Title 35: Taxi and Limousine Commission
Chapter 51: Definitions
§ 51-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   Other than words that are capitalized in the normal course (such as
"Mayor of the City of New York" or the first word in a sentence) any word (or
group of words) in these Rules that has its first letter capitalized will be a
"defined term."
   (b)   Most defined terms appear in this Chapter. For ease of reference,
certain defined terms may also appear in the "Definitions Applicable to this
Chapter" section of Chapters in which the terms are most relevant. Certain
general terms (Driver, License, Owner, for example) will have a more specific
meaning in individual Chapters. In some cases, a defined term in a Chapter can
have a meaning different from that in this Chapter (for example, a Broker in 35
RCNY
Chapter 65 is different). Those different definitions will appear in the
relevant Chapters.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 51-02 Penalties.
This Chapter is informational in nature and does not contain penalties.
§ 51-03 Definitions.
Accessible E-Hail Request. An Accessible E-Hail Request is any request for an
Accessible Taxicab or Accessible Street Hail Livery that is initiated via a
TLC-licensed E-Hail Application Provider.
Accessible Medallion is a Restricted Medallion valid for use only with an
Accessible Taxicab.
Accessible Street Hail Livery. An Accessible Street Hail Livery is a Street
Hail Livery that is required to be used with a Commission approved vehicle that
is designed to transport persons in wheelchairs or whose design is altered to
permit access and enable the transportation of persons in wheelchairs or
contains a physical device permitting such access, in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. The Accessible Taxi Dispatcher is the entity which,
under contract with the Commission, will convey dispatches, or requests for
accessible service to Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs and to Drivers of
Accessible Street Hail Liveries to provide transportation for a Passenger or
group of Passengers, at least one of whom must be mobility-impaired, for trips
that originate in New York City.
Accessible Taxicab is a Vehicle that is licensed by the Commission and that
meets the specifications of the Americans with Disabilities Act as described in
35 RCNY §
67-05.2.
Accessible Vehicle is a TLC-licensed vehicle designed to permit access to and
enable the transportation of persons who use wheelchairs and is authorized by
the Commission to transport passengers for hire, by prearrangement.
Administrative Code refers to the Administrative Code of the City of New York,
including Title 19, "Transportation of Passengers for Hire by Motor Vehicles."
Administrator means the duly appointed administrator, executor, executrix or
personal representative of an estate.
Agent is an individual or Business Entity that has been licensed by the
Commission to operate or facilitate the operation of one or more Taxicabs on
behalf of the Taxicab owner.
Alternative Fuel Medallion is a Restricted Medallion valid for use only with a
vehicle powered by compressed natural gas or a hybrid electric vehicle that
complies with 35 RCNY §
67-05 and must be used with an Accessible Taxicab Model meeting the
specifications set forth in 35 RCNY §
67-05.2.
Appeal is the request for review of a decision of a Hearing Officer.
Appeals Unit is a unit within the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH
responsible for deciding cases on Appeal, who do not hear cases in the first
instance.
Applicant is an individual or Business Entity seeking approval from the
Commission for a new or renewed License or authorization, or for a change,
transfer or other action requiring Commission approval.
Associated Base is a For-Hire Base using the same name or trade, business, or
operating name as another For-hire Base.
Authorization means the Commission's approval to operate a Commuter Van Service
within the geographic boundaries specified by the Commission.
Authorized means that a Commuter Van Service has been given permission to
operate by the Commission.
Authorized Driver Education Training refers to a course of training that
contains instruction on topics such as Commission rules and procedures,
geography, map reading, passenger relations, and courtesy.
Authorized License Renewal Course refers to a course of training that is
required for renewal of a Driver's License, and that includes topics such as an
update of Rule changes, a review of Driver Responsibilities and duties,
passenger relations, and an awareness of serving passengers with disabilities.
Available Vehicle means a For-Hire Vehicle that is available to accept
dispatched trips from a High-Volume For-Hire Service.
Base Affiliation is a business arrangement by which a Vehicle is affiliated or
associated with a Base. Certain Vehicles must be associated with a specific
type of Base and work only with the Base with which it is affiliated.
Base (or Base Station) is the Commission licensed business dispatching a
particular type of Vehicle. This term is used more specifically in some
Chapters.
Bidder means an individual submitting a sealed bid for one or more Lots of
Taxicab Medallions or a Business Entity to which an individual Bidder assigns a
bid.
Black Car is a Vehicle that affiliates with a Black Car Base or with a High-
Volume For-Hire Service.
Black Car Base is a "central dispatch facility" (as the term is defined in New
York Executive Law, § 160-cc) and For-Hire Base, excluding a High-Volume For-
Hire Service, that operates as follows:
   (1)   All Black Car Vehicles are dispatched on a pre-arranged basis;
   (2)   All Black Car Vehicles are owned by franchisees of the Base or are
members of a cooperative that operates the Base; and
   (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of the Base's business is on a payment
basis other than direct cash payment by a Passenger.
Black Car Fund is the New York Black Car Operators' Injury Compensation Fund,
Inc. established under Article 6-F of the NYS Executive Law.
Broker is an individual or Business Entity licensed by the Commission to act as
an agent for another person or Business Entity in negotiating either of the
following:
   (1)   The transfer of any interest in a Medallion
   (2)   A loan to be secured by a Medallion or a Taxicab.
Brokerage is the business of being a Broker.
Business Entity is a sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership or limited
liability company. A Business Entity can be further limited in a Chapter.
Business Entity Persons may mean:
   (1)   The proprietor of a sole proprietorship
   (2)   All shareholders of a corporation
   (3)   All officers of a corporation
   (4)   All partners of a partnership
   (5)   All members of a limited liability company.
Certified Taximeter Technician means a technician certified by a Licensed
Taximeter Manufacturer to perform work on its Taximeters.
Chairperson shall mean the Chairperson of the Taxi and Limousine Commission or
his or her designee.
Chapter refers to a chapter in these Rules.
Chauffeur's License means:
   (1)   A Valid NYS driver's license Class A, B, C or E; or
   (2)   A Valid license of similar class from another state of which the
Licensee is a resident.
Claim Letter is a letter asserting a possible Excess Claim against an Owner of
a Taxicab Medallion.
Clean Air Vehicle is a Vehicle that uses a type of fuel which allows the
Vehicle to:
   (1)   Receive an air pollution score of 9.0 or higher from the U.S. EPA and
   (2)   Emit 6.4 tons or less of equivalent carbon dioxide per year, as
estimated by the U. S. Department of Energy.
Clean Air Vehicle Level I is a vehicle that uses a type of fuel which allows
the vehicle to:
   (1)   Receive an air pollution score of 9.5 or higher from the U.S. EPA and
   (2)   Emit 5.0 tons or less of equivalent carbon dioxide per year, as
estimated by the U. S. Department of Energy.
Clean Air Vehicle, Level II is any Clean Air Vehicle that does not meet the
standards of a Clean Air Vehicle Level I.
Closing Deadline is the date by which a winning Bidder must close on any Lot as
established in 35 RCNY §
65-07(a).
Collision is a traffic incident involving the impact of a vehicle with another
vehicle, person, animal or property. Collisions shall include those events
referenced as "incidents" and "accidents" by the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax is the tax imposed by §§ 11-801 et seq. of the
Administrative Code and includes the amount of any fines and penalties that are
due for late or non-payment. Under § 11-802 of the Administrative Code, the
vehicle owner, as defined in § 11-801 of the Administrative Code, is
responsible for payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
Commission means the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.
Commuter Van Driver's License is a License to drive a Commuter Van Vehicle
Commuter Van Service. A service that is Authorized by the Commission to use
Commuter Vans to provide transportation into, out of, or within New York City:
   (1)   on a prearranged, regular daily basis,
   (2)   over non-specified or irregular routes, and
   (3)   between a zone in a residential neighborhood and a location which will
be a work related central location, a mass transit or mass transportation
facility, a shopping center, recreational facility or airport.
Commuter Van Vehicle. A motor vehicle having a seating capacity of at least
nine (9) but not more than twenty (20) passengers that has been licensed by the
Commission to carry passengers for hire in an Authorized Commuter Van Service.
Congestion Zone is the geographic area of Manhattan south of and excluding 96th
Street.
Continuing Sex Trafficking Awareness Training refers to written materials
developed and approved by the Commission that meet the requirements of
subdivision q of § 19-505 of the Administrative Code.
Critical Injury is any injury determined to be critical by the emergency
medical service personnel responding to a crash.
Cruising is the time a For-Hire Vehicle spends available to receive dispatches
from a Base or High-Volume For-Hire Service while not transporting a passenger.
Cruising includes the time a For-Hire Vehicle spends driving to pick up a
passenger on a trip dispatched by a Base or a High-Volume For-Hire Service.
Decal is a sticker issued by the Commission and attached to a For-Hire Vehicle
as evidence that it is a Licensed Vehicle.
De-licensed means an individual or Business Entity whose License is suspended
or revoked.
Default is a decision against a Respondent after a Respondent fails to appear
for a hearing, enter a plea, or make a request to reschedule as required by 48
RCNY
Chapter 5.
Defensive Driving Course refers to a course in defensive driving and accident
prevention that is approved by the Commission and by the New York State
Department of Motor Vehicles.
Digital Wallet Application. An application residing on an electronic device
which passes user payment data to a point-of-sale device using Near-Field
Communication ("NFC") technology, does not receive payment amount information
regarding the transaction, and does not modify or edit the amount to be paid.
Discretionary Revocation is the imposition of the penalty of revocation when a
Rule does not specify that revocation must be imposed (for example, when
"revocation" follows "or" or "and/or" in a penalty box); Discretionary
Revocation can be sought by the Chairperson for any Rule violation, if the
Chairperson determines that the continued licensure of the Respondent presents
a threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
Dispatch is a request made from a Base Station to a Driver, directing the
Driver to provide transportation to a passenger who has previously arranged for
such transportation.
Dispatch and Pay. A type of E-Payment for a licensed E-Hail Application that
allows passengers to pay for E-Hailed Taxicab or Street Hail Livery fares
through the E-Hail Application.
Dispatch Equipment. The "Dispatch Equipment" is the communications equipment
provided by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher or an acceptable interface with the
Taxicab Technology System and the Street Hail Livery Technology System, that
allows Approved Drivers operating Accessible Vehicles to receive dispatches
from the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
Dispatch Fee is the fee payable to the Driver of an Accessible Taxicab,
according to the Dispatch Fee schedule, for completing or attempting to
complete a trip dispatched by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. The Dispatch Fee
schedule, including cancellation fees and passenger no-show fees, will be
determined by the Commission, and posted on the Commission's website, every six
months based on a review of available funds and the Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher's service rates.
Distracted Driving Course means a course of training that is approved by the
Commission and that covers the dangers of driving while Using an Electronic
Communication Device and about the rules governing the Using of an Electronic
Communication Device.
DMV means the NYS Department of Motor Vehicles.
DMV Points means points assessed by the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles or an equivalent licensing agency of the Driver’s state of residence
on a Driver’s Chauffer’s License.
Driver is a person licensed by the Commission to drive a Commission-Licensed
Vehicle.
Driver Authorization Statement is the document an Owner files with the
Commission indicating that a Taxicab will be operated by the Named Drivers
listed or by Unspecified Drivers, along with the required additional
information.
Drugs mean any drug or other substance defined as a controlled substance in §
3306 of the Public Health Law.
E-Hail is a Hail requested through an E-Hail Application, which can be offered
as either a metered fare trip or a Flex Fare trip, at the discretion of the E-
Hail Application Provider. An E-Hail can be requested for a trip that is
fulfilled by either a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle or a non-accessible
vehicle; the E-Hail Application Provider must be able to provide a Wheelchair
Accessible Vehicle option to passengers.
E-Hail Application or E-Hail App. A Software program licensed by the TLC under
35 RCNY
Chapter 78 residing on a smartphone or other electronic device and integrated
with the Technology System which performs one or more of the following
functions:
   1)   allows a passenger to identify the location(s) of available Taxicabs or
Street Hail Liveries in a given area and allows a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Driver to identify the location of a passenger who is currently ready to
travel;
   2)   allows a passenger to hail a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery via the
electronic device;
   3)   allows a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver to receive a hail request
from such a passenger if the application provides for connecting a passenger to
a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver; or
   4)   E-Payment.
E-Payment. A feature of a licensed E-Hail Application that is either Dispatch
and Pay or Hail and Pay.
Electronic Communication Device means any portable or hands-free electronic
device able to do any of the following:
   (1)   Make a telephone call.
   (2)   Send or receive a text message.
   (3)   Allow a user to speak on the device hands-free or operate the device
by voice command, even when allowed by New York State Law.
   (4)   Act as a personal digital assistant.
   (5)   Send or receive data, voice or images from the internet or from a
wireless network.
   (6)   Act as a laptop or portable computer.
   (7)   Send or receive pages.
   (8)   Allow two-way communications between different people or parties.
   (9)   Play games.
   (10)   Play music, audio, or video.
   (11)   Make or display images.
   (12)   Transfer images, sound, text or messages.
   (13)   Provide a function which can distract a Driver.
   Exceptions: Any device specifically authorized to be used while a Driver is
driving a Vehicle by a Rule is NOT an Electronic Communication Device. A GPS is
NOT an Electronic Communication Device as long as the Vehicle is legally
standing or parked while the Driver is inputting or transmitting data.
Electronic Trip Record System is the hardware and software that collects and
stores the data that must be recorded for each passenger trip.
Electronic Tablet / Approved Tablet / Approved Electronic Tablet are terms used
interchangeably referring to all Interior Advertising System hardware in For-
Hire Vehicles.
Email Address is the email address designated by a Licensee or an Applicant for
a License where the Licensee or Applicant will receive notices, appointments,
reminders or other correspondence from the Commission. Any communication from
the Commission, except notices and summonses for which the manner of service is
specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the Email Address. The Email address
is not the Mailing Address.
Escrow Amount is the amount for which an escrow account is required to be
established in order to satisfy one or more Excess Claims.
Excess Claim is a tort claim asserted against the Owner of a Taxicab Medallion
for more than the amount of insurance covering the Taxicab at the time the
claim arose.
Exclusive Listing means that the Broker has been given the right to be the only
Broker for a particular transaction. Usually the right will be limited to a
specific period of time.
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle means (1) conviction of any of the
following crimes set forth in the New York State penal law: promoting
prostitution in the third degree; promoting prostitution in the second degree;
promoting prostitution in the first degree; sex trafficking; or compelling
prostitution, and (2) using a vehicle licensed by the Commission to commit such
a crime.
Fair Market Value in reference to the transfer of a Taxicab Medallion is the
average value of arms-length transactions for similar Medallions during the
prior calendar month, as determined by the Commission.
Final Decision is the decision of the Hearing Officer at the Taxi and Limousine
Tribunal at OATH and is subject to the appeals process provided for in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 and the Chairperson review process provided for in 35 RCNY §
68-12.
Finding of Public Need is a determination that a CommuterVan Service being
proposed will be required either now or in the future for the convenience and
necessity of the public.
Feed Line is the line of Taxicabs that feeds into the specific pick-up location
to pick up a Passenger.
Fit to Hold a License means
   •   The Applicant or Licensee meets and will continue to meet all of the
qualifications for the License sought or held as established by applicable
Rules and laws.
   •   The Applicant or Licensee is of good moral character.
   •   The Applicant or Licensee has been and will be candid and forthcoming
with the Commission and honest in dealing with the public.
   •   The Applicant or Licensee has reliably complied with and will reliably
comply with all of the rules and laws associated with holding the particular
TLC License.
   •   Where an Applicant has engaged in conduct that resulted or could have
resulted in the suspension or revocation of a TLC License, the Applicant shows
that he or she will not engage in similar conduct in the future.
Flat Rate is a definite dollar amount that will be charged to a Taxicab
passenger for a specific trip, and is fixed before the trip begins (NOTE:
"double the Taximeter" is not a Flat Rate)
Fleet is a Business Entity organized for the purpose of owning or operating
Taxicabs that meets the following requirements:
   (1)   Controls a minimum of 25 Taxicabs
   (2)   has a single business location that is adequate for the storage,
maintenance, repair and dispatch of the Fleet Taxicabs and the storage and
maintenance of records
   (3)   operates with a dispatcher on the premises at least 18 hours every
day, who assigns Drivers to Fleet Taxicabs.
Flex Fare Trip is an E-Hail requested through a TLC-licensed E-Hail application
for yellow taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries with an upfront, non-metered,
binding fare in dollars and cents, inclusive of all taxes, fees, and any price
multiplier, for the specific trip requested, prior to dispatching the trip.
Flex Fare Rate Schedule is a rate schedule subject to approval by the
Commission, outlining the manner in which the E-Hail App will calculate fares,
including the rate of fare it will use, any variable or surge pricing policies,
the breakdown of surcharges (no-show fees, cancelation fees, MTA Tax, Taxicab/
SHL Improvement, etc.) and any other fees charged to the passengers.
For-Hire Base (or "Base") is the Commission-licensed business for dispatching
For-Hire Vehicles and the physical location from which For-Hire Vehicles are
dispatched; a For Hire Base can be any of the following: A Black Car Base, A
Livery Base (or Base Station), A Luxury Limousine Base, A High-Volume For-Hire
Service.
For-Hire Driver is the Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle.
For-Hire Vehicle is a motor Vehicle licensed by the Commission to carry
Passengers for-hire in the City, which:
   (1)   Has a seating capacity of 20 or fewer Passengers
   (2)   Has three or more doors;
   (3)   Is not a Taxicab, a Commuter Van, or an authorized bus as defined by
NYS law.
GPS means a device using a global positioning navigation system to which all of
the following apply:
   (1)   The GPS uses a voice function to convey directions.
   (2)   The Driver does not input or transmit data unless legally standing or
parked.
   (3)   The GPS transmits only geographical direction information.
   (4)   Except for the transmission of geographical direction information, the
GPS cannot be used as an Electronic Communication Device in any other way.
   (Note: A GPS which a Driver is operating by inputting or transmitting data
while the Vehicle is not legally standing or parked is an Electronic
Communication Device.)
Government means the United States, any state or territory, or any political
subdivision of a state or territory.
Hack-up means to outfit a vehicle as a Medallion Taxicab and obtain approval
from the Commission for that vehicle to serve as a Taxicab for the first time.
Hail. A request, either through a verbal (audio) action such as calling out,
yelling, or whistling, and/or a visible physical action such as raising one's
hand or arm, or through an electronic method such as an E-Hail App, for on-
demand Taxicab or Street Hail Livery service at the metered rate of fare as set
forth in 35 RCNY §
58-26 and 35 RCNY §
82-26 by a person who is currently ready to travel.
Hail and Pay. A type of E-Payment for a licensed E-Hail Application that allows
passengers to pay for Street-Hailed Taxicab or Street Hail Livery fares through
the E-Hail Application.
Hail Exclusionary Zone. The Hail Exclusionary Zone is the area in which Street
Hail Liveries are NOT permitted to accept a passenger by hail. The Hail
Exclusionary Zone is:
   (1)   Manhattan south of East 96th St. and West 110th St.
   (2)   The New York City Airports.
Hail Trip. A Hail Trip, for a Street Hail Livery, is a trip commenced by the
Street Hail Livery Driver accepting a passenger by hail.
Hail Zone. The Hail Zone is the area in which Street Hail Liveries are
permitted to accept passengers by hail. The Hail Zone is all areas of New York
City except:
   (1)   Manhattan south of East 96th St. and West 110th St.
   (2)   The New York City Airports.
Hardware. Equipment or machinery, together with all associated components,
media, firmware and other embedded software and instructions provided, operated
or maintained in connection with the functioning of a Technology System.
Hearing is the presentation and consideration of evidence before an
Administrative Law Judge.
Hearing Induction Loop is a device that transmits sound directly to hearing
aids equipped with a "T-coil" (a small copper wire located inside the hearing
aid) or cochlear implants.
Hearing Officer is a person designated by the Chief Administrative Law Judge of
OATH, or his or her designee, to carry out the adjudicatory powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal.
High-Volume For-Hire Service is a central dispatch facility, as such term is
defined in New York Executive Law §160-cc, that (1) is a Commission-licensed
business, (2) facilitates or otherwise connects passengers to for-hire vehicles
by prearrangement, including through one or more licensed For-Hire Bases, using
a passenger-facing booking tool, and (3) dispatches or facilitates the
dispatching of ten-thousand (10,000) or more trips in the City per day. Any and
all bases using a common brand, trade, business or operating name will be
considered together for purposes of identifying a High-Volume For-Hire Service.
Hybrid Electric Vehicle is a commercially available, mass-produced vehicle
originally equipped by the manufacturer with a combustion engine system and an
electric propulsion system that operate in an integrated manner.
Independent Base Station is a Livery Base Station that is designated as an
independent livery base under § 18-c of the NYS Workers' Compensation Law
because it has joined the Livery Fund.
Independent Livery Driver is the Driver of a Livery which is affiliated with an
Independent Base Station.
Independent Medallion is a class of Medallion Taxicab License, the owner of
which may only own one Medallion.
Initial High-Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period is the three month period
beginning on a date posted on the Commission's website during which a Base, or
collection of Bases operating under the same brand, trade, business, or
operating name, that connects passengers to For-Hire Vehicles by prearrangement
and dispatches or facilitates the dispatching of ten thousand or more trips in
the City per day using a passenger-facing booking tool must apply for a High-
Volume For-Hire Service License under
Subchapter 59D of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59 or be listed as a Base through which a High-Volume For-Hire Service
dispatches trips on an application for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License.
Initial Street Hail Livery Base Issuance Period. The Initial Street Hail Livery
Base Issuance Period will be the one month period beginning on a date posted on
the Commission's Web site during which Street Hail Livery Base Licenses will be
issued.
Initial Street Hail Livery License Issuance Period. The Initial Street Hail
Livery License Issuance Period is the one-year period beginning on the date of
issuance of the first Street Hail Livery License.
Interior Advertising Provider is a business that has been licensed by the
Commission to own, sell, lease, make available for use, provide and/or supply
Approved Electronic Tablets and Software for Interior Advertising Systems in
For-Hire Vehicles.
Interior Advertising/Interior Advertising System are terms used interchangeably
referring to an integrated system consisting of an Approved Electronic Tablet
and Software, complying with the technical requirements set forth in
Subchapter 59E of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59, installed in a For-Hire Vehicle.
Issuing Jurisdiction is a county within New York State and covered by and
compliant with section 498 of the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law that issues
its own approval to allow a vehicle within its jurisdiction to contract for
hire and perform pre-arranged pick-ups and drop-offs of one or more Passengers.
Legatee means someone to whom the proceeds of an estate are to be distributed.
License is the formal approval given by the Commission certifying that a
Driver, Owner, Vehicle, Base Station or other service, business or equipment
has met the relevant criteria and is now qualified to operate under the
supervision of the Commission. An Authorization is a License.
Licensed Taxicab. See "Taxicab" (The terms "Medallion Taxicab," "Licensed
Medallion Taxicab," and "Taxicab" mean the same thing, and may be used
interchangeably.)
Licensee is an individual or Business Entity that has been issued a License by
the Commission, and shall include Licensees whose Licenses have been suspended
unless the context of these rules clearly dictate otherwise.
Limited Business Entity Persons are all Business Entity Persons except
shareholders holding less than 10% of the stock of the Business Entity.
Livery is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a Livery Base Station.
Livery Base Station ("Base" or "Base Station") is a For-Hire Base that operates
as follows:
   (1)   All Livery Vehicles are dispatched from the Base on a pre-arranged
basis.
   (2)   All Livery Vehicles are designed to carry fewer than six (6)
Passengers
   (3)   Passengers are charged for service on the basis of a flat rate, time,
mileage, or zones.
Livery Fund is the independent livery driver benefit fund established under
Article 6-G of the NYS Executive Law.
Long-Haul is a trip that begins at certain transportation terminals and is of
at least a certain distance or time.
Long-Term Driver is a Licensed Medallion Taxicab Driver who meets all of the
following conditions:
   (1)   Personally drives the Taxicab at an annual rate of at least 160 hours
per month;
   (2)   Owns the Medallion or is leasing the Medallion for a term of no less
than five months; and
   (3)   Is a Long-Term Driver on no more than one Taxicab.
Lot is one or more Medallions being sold in a single unit. See 35 RCNY
Chapter 65, Medallion Sales.
A Luxury Limousine is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a Luxury
Limousine Base.
A Luxury Limousine Base is a For-Hire Base that operates as follows:
   (1)   All Luxury Limousines are dispatched from the Base by pre-arrangement;
   (2)   Luxury Limousine Vehicles have a seating capacity of 20 or fewer
Passengers;
   (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of its business is on a payment basis
other than direct cash payment by a Passenger.
   (4)   Passengers are charged "garage to garage" service on the basis of a
flat rate, time or mileage.
Mailing Address is the address (other than the Email Address) designated by a
Licensee or an Applicant for a License where Licensee or Applicant will receive
notices, summonses and other communications sent by mail; specific requirements
are noted as applicable in Chapter definitions. Any communication from the
Commission is sufficient if sent to the Mailing Address.
Mandatory Revocation is the imposition of the penalty of revocation when a Rule
specifies that revocation must be imposed.
Manufacturer's Representative. An individual or Business Entity appointed by a
Taximeter Manufacturer to hold a License on behalf of that manufacturer and to
carry out that manufacturer's duties and responsibilities as a Licensee under
this chapter.
Market Value in reference to the transfer of a Taxicab Medallion will be the
greater of: (i) the actual consideration being paid for the transfer; or (ii)
the Fair Market Value.
Maximum Escrow Amount means:
   (1)   the Market Value of the Taxicab Medallion being transferred less the
value of any debt or liens secured by the Medallion and the Transfer costs
   PLUS
   (2)   the value of any proceeds of any refinancing received by the Owner
which was not used to reduce any previously existing debt or liens secured by
the Medallion following the date of an occurrence of an alleged tort involving
the Taxicab which tort gives rise to a potential Excess Claim.
Medallion is the numbered plate originally issued by the Commission and affixed
to the outside of a Taxicab as physical evidence that the Taxicab has been
licensed to operate as a Medallion Taxicab.
Medallion Taxicab. See "Taxicab". (The terms "Medallion Taxicab," "Licensed
Taxicab," and "Taxicab" mean the same thing, and may be used interchangeably.)
Merchant means an individual or Business Entity who holds a Commission License
and who has agreed to do the following:
   (1)   Facilitate contracts between Taxicab Technology Service Providers or
Street Hail Livery Technology System Providers and, for each Provider, one of
the ten largest, by volume, merchant banks in the United States or one credit/
debit card services processor who meets PCI standards (as defined in 35 RCNY
Chapter 66), and
   (2)   Enter into a contract for the provision of credit/debit card services
for in-vehicle payment of Taxicab or Street Hail Livery fares.
Minifleet is a Business Entity licensed by the Commission to own and operate
two or more taxicabs; Minifleets often contract with a Fleet for the daily
storage and dispatch of its Taxicabs.
Minifleet Medallion means a Medallion Taxicab License that is classified and
must be owned in groups of at least two.
MTA Tax is the 50 cent tax on taxicab trips imposed by Article 29-A of the NYS
Tax Law.
New Rules means
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York and any amendments that become
effective on and after the Activation Date.
Notice of Seizure is a document served upon and mailed to an owner of a vehicle
that has been seized and removed to a secure facility.
NYC (or "the City") means New York City.
NYS means New York State.
OATH is the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
OATH Administrative Law Judge (OATH ALJ) is a person appointed by the Chief
Administrative Law Judge of OATH, or his or her designee, pursuant to Section
1049(1)(a) of the Charter, to carry out the adjudicatory powers, duties and
responsibilities of the OATH Tribunal.
OATH Tribunal is the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings
tribunal established by Section 1048(1) of the Charter and 48 RCNY
Chapter 1.
Official Bus Route means the route, including all stops, traveled upon by a bus
line that is operated by:
   (1)   The New York City Transit Authority
   (2)   The City of New York, or
   (3)   A private bus company that is regulated or franchised by local law or
Charter provision in accordance with section 80(4) of the Transportation Law.
Old Rules means
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York as in effect before the
Activation Date.
Owner means the legal owner and is further defined in each relevant Chapter.
Paratransit Base or Base Station is the facility from which a paratransit
service operates a transportation service for Persons with Disabilities,
including all ambulette services.
Paratransit Disability is a physical or mental impairment, including a mobility
impairment which requires the use of a wheelchair, three-wheeled motorized
scooter or other mobility aid, or prevents a person from boarding, riding or
disembarking from a vehicle without the assistance of a wheelchair lift or
other boarding assistance device.
Paratransit Vehicle (also know as a wheelchair accessible van) is any motor
vehicle, equipped with a hydraulic lift or ramp(s) designed for the purpose of
transporting persons who use wheelchairs or containing any other physical
devices designed to permit access to and the transportation of a person with a
Paratransit Disability
Passenger means a person riding in a Vehicle, other than the Driver.
Passenger Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training refers to a
course of training that contains instruction on: (i) the legal requirements
that apply to transportation of People with Disabilities; (ii) passenger
assistance techniques, including a review of various disabilities, disability
etiquette, mobility equipment training (including direct hands-on familiarity
with lift/ramp operations and various types of wheelchairs), and safety
procedures; (iii) individual hands-on training with an actual person using a
wheelchair; (iv) sensitivity awareness, including customer service and conflict
resolution policies; and (v) the dispatch of vehicles by an accessible
dispatcher.
Passenger-Facing Booking Tool is an application on a smartphone or other
electronic device that allows communication between a Passenger and a For-Hire
Base or High-Volume For-Hire Service. Such communication includes but is not
limited to allowing a Passenger to request, book, or pay for a trip.
Passenger Manifest is the document on which a Commuter-Van Driver enters the
name of each passenger to be picked up.
Penalty Point is a non-monetary penalty assessed against either a Base Owner or
the Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle if they are convicted of certain violations of
these Rules.
Persistent Violator Program establishes additional penalties for Drivers who
repeatedly violate certain laws and rules within a certain amount of time.
Persistent Violator penalties are determined based on DMV Points and TLC
Points.
Persons with a Disability (or People with Disabilities) means an individual or
individuals with a physical or mental disability, including a person who uses a
wheelchair, crutches, three-wheeled motorized scooter, other mobility aid, or a
Service Animal, but who can transfer from such a mobility aid to a Taxicab,
For-Hire Vehicle or Commuter Van with or without reasonable assistance.
Petition is a request or application for the Commission to adopt a rule.
Point Reduction Course refers to a course that drivers can voluntarily take to
reduce points accumulated under the Persistent Violator Program.
Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone. The Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone is the area
in which Street Hail Liveries are NOT permitted to begin a Pre-Arranged Trip.
The Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone is:
   (1)   Manhattan south of East 96th St. and West 110th St.
Pre-Arranged Trip. A Pre-Arranged Trip, for a Street Hail Livery, is a trip
commenced by a Passenger pre-arranging a trip through a Base, by telephone,
smartphone application, website, or other method. Note that a Street Hail
Livery cannot accept a Pre-Arranged Trip beginning in the Pre-Arranged
Exclusionary Zone. A Pre-Arranged Trip does NOT include a trip that is regular
paratransit service or is service provided to individuals with disabilities by
or on behalf of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority.
Prior Claim Letter is a Claim Letter received by the Commission prior to
February 1, 2009.
Qualified Vehicle License (or "QVL") is the license issued by a Qualified
Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's vehicles authorizing them to provide pre-
arranged, for-hire transportation within its boundaries.
Qualified Driver's License (or "QDL") is a license issued by a Qualified
Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's drivers authorizing them to operate an
authorized vehicle to provide pre-arranged, for-hire transportation within its
boundaries.
Rate Card is a card issued by the Commission for each Medallion Taxicab, which
displays the Taxicab Medallion number, Rates of Fare, and such other data as
the Commission may require.
Rate Schedule is the Commission-approved listing of the manner in which and the
amount of fare a Commission service is permitted to charge a passenger.
Rates of Fare is a listing of the manner and amount of fares Medallion Taxicab
Drivers may charge passengers, as established by the Commission.
Reciprocity (or Reciprocal Recognition) means that:
   (1)   New York City For-Hire Vehicles and Drivers can pick up or drop off
Passengers in a Qualified Jurisdiction for trips ending or beginning in NYC,
and
   (2)   Vehicles and drivers that are licensed to perform for-hire
transportation by a Qualified Jurisdiction can pick up or drop off Passengers
in NYC for trips ending or beginning in a Qualified Jurisdiction.
Recommended Decision. A Recommended Decision is a decision made by an OATH ALJ
following a Hearing that must be reviewed by the Chairperson, either in its
entirety or for the appropriateness of the penalty being imposed, before it
becomes final.
Reserve Status Bids are the highest ten percent of the non-winning bids in each
category, unless the Chairperson determines that a greater number of non-
winning bids will receive Reserve Status and sets a higher qualifying
percentage. A bid holding Reserve Status is a Reserve Status Bid and is
converted to a winning bid when a winning Bidder fails to comply with the
Closing Deadlines established in these Rules.
Respondent is an individual or Business Entity who has been noticed and charged
with a violation of one or more of these Rules or the Administrative Code, or
with being not Fit to Hold a License.
Restricted Medallion is a Medallion restricted to use with a particular type of
vehicle, such as either an Accessible Medallion or an Alternative Fuel
Medallion;
Roof Light is a light attached to the roof of a vehicle, or extending above the
roofline of a vehicle, for the purpose of displaying information.
Rule(s) refers to any rule adopted by the Commission, or this set of Rules that
comprises
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York.
Safety and Emissions Inspection means the required vehicle inspections
conducted at the Commission's inspection facility.
Scheduled Retirement Date is the date on which a Taxicab must be retired from
service, as determined in 35 RCNY §
67-18, unless extended as provided in 35 RCNY §
67-19.
Seal means a prophylactic device, approved by the Commission, that is used on a
Taximeter, wire, wiring mechanism, gear or other device, so that no adjustment,
repair, alteration or replacement can be made without removing or mutilating
the Seal or Seals.
Seating Capacity means the maximum number of adult passengers a vehicle is
intended to carry according to the manufacturer's specifications.
Second Street Hail Livery Base Issuance Period. The Second Street Hail Livery
Base Issuance Period will be the five month period beginning the day after the
Initial Street Hail Livery Base Issuance Period ends and will be the second
period during which Street Hail Livery Base Licenses will be issued.
Second Street Hail Livery License Issuance Period. The Second Street Hail
Livery License Issuance Period is the one-year period beginning the day after
the Initial Street Hail Livery License Issuance Period ends, and ending 12
months later.
Secondary Owner is an individual or Business Entity that has a lien or mortgage
or any other type of legal interest in a Vehicle.
Secured Lender Escrow Amount means the Market Value of the Taxicab Medallion
being transferred less the value of any debt or liens secured by Medallion and
the Transfer Costs.
Secured Lender Recipient means a secured creditor seeking to repossess or
foreclose upon a Taxicab Medallion in order to realize the value of its secured
interest, but not applying to operate the Taxicab Medallion and not eligible to
be considered a Transferee, provided the Secured Lender Recipient places the
Medallion in storage as required in 35 RCNY §
58-46(c).
Serious Crash is a crash in which any person has suffered Critical Injury or
death.
Service Animal means an animal that performs a task or specific set of tasks to
assist a person with a disability.
Sex Trafficking Awareness Training refers to a training course developed and
approved by the Commission that meets the requirements of subdivision q of §
19-505 of the Administrative Code.
Sexual Contact means any touching of the sexual or other intimate parts of a
person by the licensee. It also includes the touching of the licensee by the
member of the public when the touching is forced by the licensee. Touching can
be direct or through clothing, as well as the emission of ejaculate by the
licensee upon any part of the member of the public, clothed or unclothed.
Sexual Harassment means engaging in any conversation or conduct related to
sexual acts, sexual contact, or sexual/intimate body parts, or expressing a
desire to enter into a sexual relationship or asking about a person's sexual
relationships.
Short Haul is a trip that begins at certain transportation terminals and is
less than of less than a certain distance or time.
Software. The object code versions of any applications, programs, operating
system software, computer software languages, utilities, other computer
programs and related documentation in whatever form or media, including the
tangible media upon which such applications, programs, operating system
software, computer software languages, utilities, other computer programs and
related documentation are recorded or printed, together with all corrections.
Stand-By Vehicle means any vehicle licensed by the Commission to be used by a
Fleet as a replacement for a Licensed Taxicab that is temporarily out of
service.
Stop-Use Directive is a notice sent to an Owner by the Commission directing the
Owner to stop using a designated Agent because that Agent's License has been
revoked or suspended or the Agent is not permitted to manage the Owner's
Medallion(s).
Street Hail Livery. A Street Hail Livery is a Commission-licensed For-Hire
Vehicle, or, for purposes of being a Street Hail Livery, a Commission-licensed
Paratransit Vehicle, that is authorized to accept persons by hail in the Hail
Zone. A Street Hail Livery must be affiliated with a Street Hail Livery Base.
Street Hail Livery Base. A Street Hail Livery Base is a Commission-licensed
Base that affiliates and dispatches Street Hail Liveries and For-Hire Vehicles
or affiliates and dispatches Street Hail Liveries and Paratransit Vehicles, or
affiliates and dispatches only Street Hail Liveries, and the physical location
from which Street Hail Liveries or other Vehicles are dispatched.
Street Hail Livery Base License. A Street Hail Livery Base License is the
Commission issued License which authorizes a Base to act as a Street Hail
Livery Base. A Street Hail Livery Base License is not transferrable.
Street Hail Livery Driver. A Street Hail Livery Driver is a Driver who is
authorized to drive a Street Hail Livery as set forth in 35 RCNY
Chapter 80.
Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund is the City-managed fund, which is funded
by the Street Hail Livery Surcharge and from which subsidy payments will be
made to Street Hail Livery Licensees who are required to purchase an Accessible
Vehicle, and to Drivers who operate Accessible Street Hail Liveries. Certain
monies remitted to the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund will be used to make
grants of equal, set amounts to all vehicle owners who will be required to
purchase Accessible Vehicles or for other programs to enhance the accessibility
of Street Hail Liveries. Monies in the Fund may also be used for other
purposes, including, but not limited to, offsetting the costs associated with
driver training and funding the Accessible Vehicle dispatch program established
in 35 RCNY
Chapter 53. Monies in the Fund will also be paid to Drivers who operate
Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge is the surcharge of $1.00 per trip
that will be added to every Hail Trip in a Street Hail Livery. The Street Hail
Livery Improvement Surcharge will be deposited into the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Fund, except for any amounts paid directly to the Drivers of
Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
Street Hail Livery License. A Street Hail Livery License is the License
authorizing a Commission-licensed For-Hire Vehicle or Paratransit Vehicle to
act as a Street Hail Livery. A Street Hail Livery License is transferrable in
the manner provided by 35 RCNY
Chapter 82.
Street Hail Livery Licensee. A Street Hail Livery Licensee is an individual or
Business Entity which owns a Street Hail Livery License.
Street Hail Livery License Priority Issuance Period. The Street Hail Livery
License Priority Issuance Period is the three year period beginning on the
first day of the Street Hail Livery Initial Issuance Period and ending three
years later.
Substantial Interest in Taxicab Medallions means direct or indirect ownership
of four or more Medallions that can result from one or more of the following:
   (1)   Ownership of 25 percent or more of the stock in one or more
corporations that own Medallions
   (2)   Ownership of 25 percent or more of the membership interests in one or
more limited liability companies that own Medallions
   (3)   A partnership interest in one or more partnerships that own Medallions
   (4)   Being an officer in one or more corporations that, in the aggregate,
have a direct or indirect equity interest in four or more Medallions.
Summary Suspension means that a Licensee's License is suspended before a
hearing is held on the violation.
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH (or Taxi and Limousine Tribunal) is the
Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings tribunal established under 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 that has, except as otherwise provided in these Rules, jurisdiction
over:
   (1)   Violations of Title 19, Chapter 5 of the Administrative Code
   (2)   Violations of Commission Rules
   (3)   Review of the fitness of an Applicant or a Licensee to hold a License.
Taxi Stand is a place where Taxicabs are authorized (either by NYC Department
of Transportation or a transportation terminal operator) to line up and wait
for customers.
Taxicab means a motor vehicle, yellow in color, bearing a Medallion indicating
that it is licensed by the Commission to carry up to five passengers for hire
and authorized to accept hails. (The terms "Medallion Taxicab," "Licensed
Taxicab," and "Taxicab" mean the same thing, and may be used interchangeably.)
Taxicab Candidate is a vehicle being considered for use as a Taxicab Model.
Taxicab Identification Braille Plaque is a plaque required to be attached to
the interior of a taxicab that identifies in Braille its medallion number, and
contains in Braille the word COMPLAINTS and a telephone number.
Taxicab Identification Raised Lettering Plaque is a plaque required to be
attached to the interior of a taxicab that identifies in raised lettering its
medallion number, and contains in raised lettering the word COMPLAINTS and a
telephone number.
Taxicab Improvement Fund is the City-managed fund, which is funded by the
Taxicab Improvement Surcharge and from which subsidy payments will be made to
Medallion Owners or their Agents, or Drivers, who are required to purchase an
Accessible Vehicle pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-50, and to Drivers who operate Taxicabs required to be accessible pursuant
to 35 RCNY §
58-50. Monies remitted to the Taxicab Improvement Fund will be used to make
grants of equal, set amounts to all vehicle owners of vehicles in use with
Medallions who will be required to purchase Accessible Vehicles under 35 RCNY §
58-50. Monies in the Fund may also be used for other purposes, including, but
not limited to, offsetting the costs associated with driver training and
funding the Accessible Vehicle dispatch program established in 35 RCNY
Chapter 53. Monies in the Fund will also be paid to Drivers who operate
Accessible Taxicabs, including those required to be accessible pursuant to 35
RCNY §
58-50.
Taxicab Improvement Surcharge is the surcharge of $1.00 per trip that will be
added to every taxicab trip. The Taxicab Improvement Surcharge will be
deposited into the Taxicab Improvement Fund, except for any amounts paid
directly to the Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs.
Taxicab License is the authority granted by the Commission for an Applicant to
own and operate a designated vehicle as a Taxicab within the Commission's
jurisdiction, as evidenced by the Medallion affixed to the hood of the vehicle.
Taxicab Model is a Taxicab Candidate that has been verified by the Commission
as complying with the standard specifications set forth in 35 RCNY §
67-05.1 or §
67-05.2.
Taximeter is an instrument or device approved by the Commission that
automatically calculates and plainly indicates the charge to a passenger for
hire in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery.
Taximeter Business is a business licensed by the Commission that sells new or
used Taximeter equipment or installs, repairs, adjusts, tests, seals, or
calibrates Taximeters and/or Taxicab Roof Lights.
Taximeter Manufacturer means an entity licensed by the Commission that
manufacturers Taximeters; only Taximeters made by a licensed Taximeter
Manufacturer may be installed or used in Taxicabs.
Taxpayer is a person or Business Entity required to pay the MTA Tax.
Technology System is an integrated system of Hardware and Software installed in
a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery that complies with the technical requirements
set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-24.
Technology System Provider means a vendor who has been licensed by the
Commission to install and maintain Technology Systems in Taxicabs and Street
Hail Liveries.
Third Street Hail Livery License Issuance Period. The Third Street Hail Livery
License Issuance Period is the period beginning the day after the Second Street
Hail Livery License Issuance Period ends.
TLC Driver License means the authority granted by the Commission to an
individual to drive a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery in the
City of New York.
TLC Points means points assessed by the Commission on a Driver’s TLC Driver
License, Commuter Van Driver License, or Paratransit Driver’s License for the
violation of certain TLC Rules.
Tort Letter is a statement from the insurer of a Taxicab stating whether or not
the insurer is aware of any Excess Claims against the Taxicab Medallion or its
Owner.
Transfer means the transfer of all or any portion of a Medallion ownership
interest, including the transfer of interests in a Business Entity owning
Medallions.
Transferee is an Applicant seeking approval from or approved by the Chairperson
to own and operate a Medallion Taxicab in which Applicant is acquiring or has
acquired an interest, either directly or indirectly, through a transfer
described in 35 RCNY §
58-43.
Transfer Costs means the administrative costs involved in processing a transfer
of ownership of a Taxicab Medallion, including the costs of any foreclosure or
similar action and any outstanding fines or fees owed to the Commission or the
Parking Violations Bureau.
Transferor is the Owner of an interest in a Taxicab Medallion being
transferred.
Trip Data is the data that is required to be collected and transmitted by a
Technology System including those items described in 35 RCNY §
66-24(f).
Trip Record (or Trip Sheet) refers to the hand-written or electronic collection
of data that is required to be kept for each passenger trip.
Unlicensed Activity is the provision or advertising of any Commission-regulated
for-hire transportation service by any (i) Licensee whose License is suspended,
revoked, or expired and not yet renewed, or by any (ii) person who does not
hold a Valid License or Authorization for the vehicle, for the driver of the
vehicle and, if applicable, for the service. Unlicensed Activity includes these
activities specified in § 19-506 and § 19-529 of the Administrative Code, and
can subject the violator to the seizure and possible forfeiture of his or her
vehicle.
Unrestricted Medallion is a Medallion Taxicab License that may be used with the
type of vehicle specified in 35 RCNY §
67-05.
USPS is the United States Postal Service
Unspecified Driver is a term that is entered on a Rate Card indicating that the
Taxicab can be driven by any Licensed Taxicab Driver whose name (or category)
has been filed with the Commission by the Owner of that Taxicab.
Use an Electronic Communication Device (or Using an Electronic Communication
Device) means to:
   (1)   Operate any function of an Electronic Communication Device in any way,
or
   (2)   Have a device permitting hands-free operation of an Electronic
Communication Device in or near the ear.
Valid means a license or other document which is not expired, suspended,
revoked, conditional or restricted as to its use by the Commission, the New
York State Department of Motor Vehicles or an agency of another state which
licenses vehicles and drivers of vehicles or issues violations of traffic laws
or regulations.
Valid Claim Letter is a Claim Letter which is not a Prior Claim Letter, and
which:
   (1)   Is dated no more than one year prior to the date documentation is
submitted to the Chairperson for a proposed transfer of a Taxicab Medallion;
   (2)   Sets forth a minimum claim in an amount sufficient to be an "Excess
Claim"
   (3)   Includes a copy of the police report regarding the incident in
question; and
   (4)   Includes a representation by the sender that the party against which
the Excess Claim has been asserted has been provided with a copy of the Claim
Letter.
Vehicle is a motor vehicle licensed by the Commission for the purpose of
providing for hire transportation.
Vehicle Owner means the individual or Business Entity in whose name is Vehicle
is registered and in whose name the Vehicle License is issued, as further
specified in these Rules.
Weapon is any firearm (as defined in the New York State Penal Law) for which a
license has not been issued as provided in the New York State Penal Law and the
Administrative Code of the City of New York, electronic dartgun, gravity knife,
switchblade knife, cane sword, billy, blackjack, bludgeon, metal knuckles,
chuka stick, sandstick, slingshot, pilum ballistic knife, sand bag, sand club,
wrist brace type slingshot, shirken, kung fu star, dagger, dangerous knife,
dirk, razor, stiletto, imitation pistol or any other instrument or thing
whether real or simulated, and capable of inflicting or threatening bodily
harm, including but not limited to any other weapons, the possession of which
is prohibited pursuant to the New York State Penal Law.
Wheelchair Passenger is a Passenger using a wheelchair.
Wheelchair using Passenger is a Passenger using a Wheelchair.
Wiring Harness means any wire or collection of wires that is connected in any
manner to a Taximeter or that in any way affects the operation of a Taximeter.
Zero-Emission Vehicle is a vehicle that produces no direct exhaust or tailpipe
emissions and includes, but is not limited to, battery electric vehicles and
hydrogen fuel-cell electric vehicles.
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 10/23/2015,
eff. 11/22/2015; amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016; amended City
Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/20/2016, eff. 10/20/
2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/
15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended
City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/
10/2019; amended City Record 8/12/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; amended City Record 8/
19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020; amended
City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/
2021; amended City Record 11/18/2022, eff. 12/18/2022; amended City Record 2/2/
2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City
Record 10/30/2023, eff. 11/29/2023; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/
2024; amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 10/18/
2024, eff. 10/18/2024; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025; amended
City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
Chapter 52: Rules Governing the Taxi and Limousine Commission
**** Subchapter A: Reserved ****
§ 52-01 Creation and Purpose of the Commission. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 52-02 Jurisdiction of the Commission. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 52-03 General Powers of the Commission. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 52-04 Specific Powers and Duties of the Commission. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
**** Subchapter B: Petitions to Initiate Rulemaking ****
§ 52-11 Scope of this Subchapter.
This Subchapter establishes the process by which any person may petition the
Commission to consider adoption of a new Rule or Rules.
§ 52-12 Penalties.
This Subchapter is informational in nature and does not provide for any
penalties.
§ 52-13 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
[Reserved.]
§ 52-14 Procedures for Submitting Petitions.
   (a)   Who May Petition. Any person may petition the TLC to consider the
adoption of rules.
   (b)   Content of Petitions. Petitions must contain the following
information:
      (1)   The proposed language for the rule being proposed;
      (2)   A statement of the TLC's authority to promulgate the rule and its
purpose;
      (3)   The petitioner's argument in support of adopting the rule;
      (4)   The period of time the rule should be in effect;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the petitioner; and
      (6)   The signature of the petitioner.
   (c)   Format of Petitions.
      (1)   All petitions should be typewritten.
      (2)   Until the TLC adopts a form for petitioning the adoption of a rule,
the petition must be filed on plain, white letter-sized paper.
   (d)   Submission of Petitions. Petitions must be mailed or delivered to the
offices of the TLC at 40 Rector Street, New York, New York, 10006-1738, marked
to the attention of the Chairperson.
§ 52-15 Procedures for Consideration of Petitions.
   (a)   Initial Process. When a petition submitted in proper form is received,
the TLC will do the following:
      (1)   Stamp the petition with the date it was received;
      (2)   Assign the petition a processing number; and
      (3)   Forward the petition to the Chairperson, who may, at his or her
discretion, either deny the petition or present the petition for consideration
by the Commission.
      (4)   The Chairperson has 60 days to present the petition for
consideration or deny the petition.
   (b)   Denial of Petition By Chairperson.
      (1)   If the Chairperson denies a petition, he or she will present copies
of the petition and of the Chairperson's notice rejecting that petition to the
full Commission at its next regularly scheduled session.
      (2)   At this session or anytime before the Commission's next regularly
scheduled session, any Commission member may ask the Commission to consider the
petition to determine whether to initiate rulemaking. The Commission will
notify the petitioner if a determination is made to grant the petition.
      (3)   If no Commission member takes action on the petition, the
Chairperson will notify the petitioner of the Commission's decision to deny the
petition.
   (c)   Consideration by the Commission.
      (1)   If the Chairperson does not deny the petition, he/she will notify
the petitioner in writing within 60 days from the date the petition was
received of the Commission's intent to grant the petition and to initiate
rulemaking by a specific date.
      (2)   In proceeding with rulemaking, the Commission may, at its
discretion, amend or modify the language proposed by the petitioner.
§ 52-16 Appeal.
No Appeal. The Commission's decision to deny or grant a petition is final and
not subject to judicial review.
**** Subchapter C: Pilot Programs ****
§ 52-21 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   As part of the development and implementation of a broad public
transportation policy, Section 2303(b)(9) of the Charter charges the Commission
to encourage and provide for innovation and experimentation in relation to the
type and design of equipment, modes of service, and manner of operation. Such
experimentation through pilot programs may, for limited purposes and limited
periods of time, depart from the requirements established in these Rules.
   (b)   This chapter provides a regularized and transparent process for the
review, approval, implementation and evaluation of proposed pilot programs.
§ 52-22 Penalties.
This Subchapter is informational in nature and does not provide for any
penalties.
§ 52-23 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
[Reserved.]
§ 52-24 Submission of Proposals.
   (a)   Any person or entity may propose a pilot program in writing to the
Chairperson for purposes of testing and evaluating a proposed innovation.
   (b)   Proposals for a pilot program must include the following:
      (1)   A statement of the purpose or value of the proposed innovation;
      (2)   A detailed description of the proposed innovation, including, as
appropriate, diagrams, blueprints or images;
      (3)   Information regarding the use of the proposed innovation in other
jurisdictions;
      (4)   Estimates of any cost and revenue impact of the proposed innovation
on affected Licensee groups such as drivers and vehicle owners, on the
Commission and the City, and on the public;
      (5)   A description of the different ways in which the proposed
innovation would depart from otherwise applicable requirements, including these
Rules;
      (6)   A description of any effect the pilot program would have on the
safety of operations involved in the pilot program;
      (7)   The proposed duration of the pilot program;
      (8)   The number of pilot program participants necessary to achieve the
purpose of the proposed pilot program; and
      (9)   The criteria by which the value of the innovation can be measured
after implementation of the pilot program, such as cost, customer satisfaction,
Licensee satisfaction, environmental impact, and safety.
§ 52-25 Initial Review of Proposed Pilot Programs.
   (a)   Initial Review By Chairperson. The Chairperson will perform the
initial review of all pilot program proposals. The Chairperson is authorized to
assemble any information, from any source, that he or she determines to be
useful to the Commission in reviewing the proposal.
   (b)   Request for Modification or Resubmission. The Chairperson may request
that the proposal be modified or resubmitted to include additional information,
evaluations, and inspection of prototypes, tests or other processes of any kind
that may assist in the review of the proposal. The Chairperson may issue such
request to the person or entity proposing the pilot program or to any other
person or entity.
   (c)   Forward Proposed Pilot Program to Commission. The Chairperson will
forward a proposed pilot program to the Commission within 60 days of receipt of
a completed proposal. However, during the 60-day period, the Chairperson may
extend the time for forwarding the proposed pilot program.
§ 52-26 Commission Review and Grounds for Rejection.
   (a)   Consideration By Commission. The Commission will consider all proposed
pilot programs forwarded by the Chairperson and will approve or reject such
programs.
   (b)   Grounds for Rejection. Grounds for rejection include but are not
limited to the following:
      (1)   The merits of the proposal;
      (2)   The administrative ability of the Commission or its staff to
implement, monitor, or evaluate the proposed pilot program.
§ 52-27 Commission Approval of Proposal for Pilot Program.
   (a)   Resolution of Approval. Any proposed pilot program approved by the
Commission will be approved by Resolution of Approval.
   (b)   Contents of Resolution. Each Resolution of Approval will establish the
terms governing the implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of the proposed
pilot program, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   The duration of the pilot program;
      (2)   An implementation and evaluation schedule for the pilot program,
including a deadline for a final report from the Chairperson to the Commission
and a deadline for initiating rulemaking action to implement changes in the
Commission's rules. These should be based on the outcome of the pilot program
so that the proposed innovation may continue without interruption if the
Commission determines that such continuation is warranted;
      (3)   The minimum and maximum number of the pilot program's participants,
if any;
      (4)   A description of the means by which the public will be notified of
the proposed pilot program;
      (5)   A description of the process for selecting the participants in the
pilot program;
      (6)   A statement whether a safety evaluation of the proposed pilot
program will be required before or during implementation of the pilot program
and, if so, a statement of how and by whom such safety evaluation must be
conducted;
      (7)   A statement that the pilot program participants must enter into
binding agreements with the Chairperson on behalf of the Commission;
      (8)   An enumeration of the criteria to be used in evaluating the
proposed innovation during and after implementation of the pilot program; and
      (9)   A description of any reporting requirements during and after the
completion of the pilot program, including reports from the pilot program
participants to the Chairperson and from the Chairperson to the Commission.
§ 52-28 Agreements Between the Commission and the Pilot Program Participants.
   (a)   Agreement(s) Required. All persons or entities participating in any
pilot program approved by the Commission must enter into an agreement with the
Chairperson on behalf of the Commission. This agreement will govern the
preparation, implementation, and evaluation of the pilot program consistent
with the terms of the Commission's Resolution of approval.
   (b)   Differing Agreement(s). Where a pilot program involves more than one
participant, the Chairperson will determine whether the participants must enter
into identical or differing agreements.
   (c)   Approval by Corporation Counsel. Agreements made under this section
will be subject to approval as to form by the Corporation Counsel pursuant to
Section 394(b) of the Charter.
**** Subchapter D: Payments ****
§ 52-40 Form of Payment.
   (a)   In general. A Person or entity can make a payment to the Commission by
money order, bank check, certified check, credit card, debit card, e-check,
PIN-less debit card (in person) or corporate check.
   (b)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Fines. Payment of a fine must be made in the form of either:
         (i)   credit card, debit card or PIN-less debit card in person,
         (ii)   certified check, or
         (iii)   United States Postal Service money order.
      (2)   Medallion Auctions and Transfers. Payment in connection with a
Medallion auction or a Medallion transfer must be made in the form of either:
         (i)   money order
         (ii)   bank check,
         (iii)   certified check, or
         (iv)   check issued by a Taxicab Broker or Agent licensed by the
Commission.
      (3)   FOIL/Copying fees. Payment of a copying fee in connection with a
Freedom of Information Law request, or payment of a fee related to a subpoena
must be made in the form of either:
         (i)   personal or corporate check,
         (ii)   money order,
         (iii)   bank check, or
         (iv)   certified check.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 52-41 Returned Payment Fee.
   (a)   A check or money order that is returned to the Commission unpaid, or
that is declined or reversed by a bank or other institution will be considered
a "bad payment."
   (b)   A person or entity who makes a bad payment to the Commission must pay
a fee of $20 for each bad payment. The original payment remains due until both
the payment and the $20 fee are paid.
   (c)   Fines.
         (i)   If a bad payment is made for a fine, the Chairperson will treat
the fine as unpaid until both the fine and the $20 fee are paid.
         (ii)   If the bad payment is made for a fine owed by a Licensee, the
License will be suspended as if the payment had not been made.
         (iii)   The License suspension will remain in effect until both the
fine and the $20 fee are paid.
   (d)   License and Renewal License Applications.
         (i)   If a bad payment is made in connection with a License
application or a renewal License application, the original payment will remain
due until both the payment and the $20 fee are paid.
         (ii)   The Commission will treat the application or renewal
application as incomplete until both the payment and the $20 fee are paid.
         (iii)   The Commission can deny any application or renewal application
for which a bad payment is made after giving notice of the bad payment to the
Applicant. The Commission can give the Applicant a deadline to pay the original
payment plus the $20 fee before denying the Application.
         (iv)   If the Commission issues a License before it learns of a bad
payment, the Commission can give notice to the Licensee to pay the original
payment and the $20 fee within 15 days. The License will terminate
automatically unless the Licensee pays both the original payment and the $20
bad payment fee within the 15 day period.
§ 52-42 Bad Payments.
   (a)   The Chairperson can send a notice to any person or entity who submits
a bad payment at any time. For the period of time specified in the notice, the
person or entity must make payment only in the form(s) specified in the notice.
During the period covered in the notice, the Commission can return any payment
made in any other form and treat the payment as unmade.
Chapter 53: Accessible Taxicabs and Accessible Street Hail Vehicles
§ 53-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   This Chapter sets the requirements and rules for the dispatch of
Accessible Taxicabs and Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
   (b)   This Chapter applies to Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs, Owners of
Taxicab Medallions required to be hacked up with Accessible Taxicabs, [and to]
Owners of Taxicab Medallions which are hacked up with vehicles that qualify to
be Accessible Taxicabs, Drivers of Accessible Street Hail Liveries, and Owners
and Bases of Accessible Street Hail Liveries. This Chapter also applies to
Agents of any such Medallion Owners and Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017)
§ 53-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend a Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         A.   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the Taxi
and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 53-03 Definitions.
   (a)   Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. The Accessible Taxi Dispatcher is the
entity which, under contract with the Commission, will convey dispatches or
requests for accessible service to Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs and to
Drivers of Accessible Street Hail Liveries to provide transportation for a
Passenger or group of Passengers, at least one of whom must be mobility-
impaired, for trips that originate in New York City.
   (b)   Accessible Vehicle, for the purposes of this Chapter, is a vehicle
designed to permit access to and enable the transportation of persons who use
wheelchairs and is authorized by the Commission to transport passengers for
hire by prearrangement or by dispatch of the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
Accessible Vehicles, for purposes of this Chapter, include all vehicles in use
as Accessible Taxicabs, Taxicabs required or opting to be used with accessible
vehicles under 35 RCNY §
58-50, and Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
   (c)   Approved Driver. An Approved Driver is a Driver who has a Valid
License from the Commission as a TLC Driver and who has successfully completed
Passenger Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training or has a valid
Paratransit License.
   (d)   Dispatch Equipment. The "Dispatch Equipment" is the communications
equipment provided by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher or an acceptable interface
with the Technology System that allows Approved Drivers operating Accessible
Vehicles to receive dispatches from the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
   (e)   Dispatch Fee. The "Dispatch Fee" is the fee payable to the Driver of
an Accessible Vehicle, according to the Dispatch Fee schedule, for completing
or attempting to complete a trip dispatched by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
The Dispatch Fee schedule, including cancellation fees and passenger no-show
fees, will be determined by the Commission, and posted on the Commission's
website, every six months based on a review of available funds and the
Accessible Taxi Dispatcher's service rates.
   (f)   Owner. In this chapter, the Owner refers to the owner of a Medallion
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery, including a Taxicab required to be hacked up
with a vehicle that qualifies as an Accessible Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 10/23/2015, eff. 11/22/2015; amended City Record 12/15/
2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended
City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/
8/2021)
§ 53-04 Comply with Law – Approved Driver.
   (a)   Comply with this Chapter. All Accessible Taxicab Owners, Accessible
Street Hail Livery Owners and all Approved Drivers must comply with all
provisions of this chapter. Agents for Accessible Taxicab Owners and bases
dispatching or acting on behalf of Accessible Street Hail Liveries under 35
RCNY §
59B-04.2 must also comply with these Rules where applicable.
   (b)   Driver Responsibility. An Accessible Vehicle can only be driven by an
Approved Driver; that is, one who has successfully completed Passenger
Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-04(b)
 
   (c)   Owner Responsibility. A Taxicab Owner and a Street Hail Livery Owner
may not allow Drivers who are not Approved Drivers and have not successfully
completed Passenger Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training, to
operate the Owner's Accessible Taxicab or Street Hail Livery.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-04(c)
 
   (d)   Agent Responsibility. An Agent or a base may not allow Drivers who are
not Approved Drivers and have not successfully completed Passenger Assistance
and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training to operate an Accessible Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-04(d)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/15/
2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 53-05 Requirements Not Exclusive.
   (a)   Other than when this Chapter expressly provides otherwise, each
Approved Driver, each Accessible Taxicab Owner, each Owner of a Taxicab hacked
up with a Vehicle that qualifies to be hacked up as an Accessible Taxicab, each
Accessible Street Hail Livery Owner, each Base and each Agent for Accessible
Taxicab Owners and Bases dispatching or acting on behalf of Accessible Street
Hail Liveries under 35 RCNY §
59B-04.2 must comply with all applicable provisions of this Title.
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017)
§ 53-06 Dispatch Equipment for Accessible Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries.
   (a)   The Owner and/or Agent of an Accessible Vehicle and a base dispatching
or acting on behalf of an Accessible Street Hail Livery under 35 RCNY §
59B-04.2 must have Dispatch Equipment installed in the Vehicle in compliance
with a deadline announced by TLC.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(a)
 
   (b)   The Owner of an Accessible Taxicab or Accessible Street Hail Livery,
the Agent, the Base dispatching an Accessible Street Hail Livery or acting on
behalf of Accessible Street Hail Liveries under section 59B-04.2 of these Rules
and the Approved Driver must not allow operation of an Accessible Taxicab or
Accessible Street Hail Livery unless:
      (1)   The Accessible Vehicle is equipped with Dispatch Equipment.
 
            Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a hearing
35 RCNY §  and $200 if found guilty after a hearing.   Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(b)(1) Suspension of Vehicle License until
            condition is corrected
 
      (2)   While the Accessible Vehicle is in operation, the Dispatch
Equipment must be turned on, connected to the dispatch system and able to
receive dispatches.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 per day until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
53-06(b)(2)
 
      (3)   If the Dispatch Equipment becomes inoperable:
         (i)   The Approved Driver must notify the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher
and Vehicle Owner, Agent or Base within 1 hour, or by the end of his or her
shift, whichever comes first, that the Equipment is not operable.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(b)(3)(i)
 
         (ii)   The Owner, Agent or Base must replace or repair Dispatch
Equipment promptly upon being notified to do so and in no event later than 48
hours after receiving such notification.
         (iii)   An Accessible Vehicle with inoperable Dispatch Equipment
cannot operate without accepting dispatches for more than 48 hours without
repair or replacement of the Dispatch Equipment.
 
35 RCNY §            Fine: $250 and suspension until Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(b)(3)(ii)-(iii) compliance
 
   (c)   Each Approved Driver must:
      (1)   Log onto the Dispatch Equipment at the beginning of the Driver's
shift
      (2)   Log off at the conclusion of each shift,
      (3)   Communicate with the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher about dispatches,
as directed by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(c)(1) - (3)
 
      (4)   Log onto the Dispatch Equipment any time either or both of the
taximeter and the Technology System is on or engaged.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-06(c)(4)
 
   (d)   No Tampering. An Approved Driver, Agent or Owner must not
      (1)   Tamper with the Dispatch Equipment; or
      (2)   Tamper with the geographic locator equipment.
      (3)   Disable the Dispatch Equipment; or
      (4)   Render the Dispatch Equipment inoperable in any way.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
53-06(d)
 
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 53-07 Training Approved Drivers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017)
§ 53-08 Acceptance of Dispatch.
   (a)   Driver MUST Accept Dispatch.
      (1)   While operating an Accessible Vehicle, an Approved Driver must
accept a dispatch from the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher.
      (2)   An Approved Driver who does not accept a dispatch has refused to
provide service and will be subject to Mandatory Penalties for a refusal under
35 RCNY §§
80-02(e) and
80-20(a).
      (3)   An Approved Driver must not operate an Accessible Vehicle unless
the Dispatch Equipment is turned on.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 per day Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-08(a)
 
   (b)   No Prior Pick-Ups. An Approved Driver of an Accessible Vehicle who has
accepted a dispatch from the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher must not accept any
other Passenger before picking up the Passenger with a mobility impairment.
Note: This includes acceptance of another trip using an approved e-hail
application.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-08(b)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/15/
2016, eff. 1/14/2017)
§ 53-09 Fares.
   (a)   Fare Amount. The fare for transporting passengers with disabilities
following a dispatch will be the same as the current Taxicab and Street Hail
Livery fares set by the Commission.
   (b)   Rules for Calculating Fares.
      (1)   An Approved Driver of an Accessible Vehicle must not charge a fare
to a passenger with a disability higher than that indicated on the Taximeter.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100, in addition to any Mandatory Penalties required under 35 RCNY §  Appearance
53-09(b)(1) 80-17(a)                                                                      REQUIRED
 
      (2)   An Approved Driver MUST NOT turn on the Taximeter when dispatched
by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher until the Passenger is seated and secured in
the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-09(b)(2)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/15/
2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 53-10 Driver Duties Regarding Passengers Who Use Wheelchairs and Passengers
with Other Disabilities.
   (a)   Assisting the Passenger. An Approved Driver
      (1)   Must assist a passenger who uses a wheelchair or a passenger with
other disabilities when:
         (i)   Entering the vehicle from the sidewalk; and
         (ii)   Exiting from the vehicle to the curbside.
      (2)   Must secure passenger with a disability and their mobility device
within the Vehicle.
 
            Fine: $50 and suspension if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $150 if found guilty
            following a hearing and suspension. The
35 RCNY §  suspension is deferred for 60 days; if the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-10(a)    Driver completes the Vision Zero and
            Accessibility Remedial course within the
            60-day period the Driver will not be
            suspended.
 
   (b)   Packages. An Approved Driver must place the packages and parcels in
the Vehicle and secure them and must retrieve them for the Passenger at the end
of the trip upon request.
 
            Fine: $50 and suspension if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $150 if found guilty
            following a hearing and suspension. The
35 RCNY §  suspension is deferred for 60 days if the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-10(b)    Driver completes the Vision Zero and
            Accessibility Remedial course within the
            60-day period, the Driver will not be
            suspended.
 
   (c)   Service Animal(s) and Companions. An Approved Driver must accept and
provide transportation in the Accessible Taxicab for a Service Animal(s) of a
passenger with a disability and for as many companions as can be legally seated
in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance
53-10(c)    80-02(e).                                             NOT REQUIRED
 
   (d)   Waiting for the Passenger with a disability. An Approved Driver who
has accepted a dispatch must wait for the Passenger with a disability to appear
curbside at the pick up point for at least ten minutes after the time of
arrival reported by the Driver for on-demand trips, and at least ten minutes
after the scheduled pickup time indicated by the Dispatcher for advance
reservation trips.
 
            Fine: $50 and suspension if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $150 if found guilty
            following a hearing, and suspension. The
35 RCNY §  suspension is deferred for 60 days if the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-10(d)    Driver completes the Vision Zero and
            Accessibility Remedial course within the
            60-day period the Driver will not be
            suspended.
 
   (e)   Notice to Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. An Approved Driver who has
accepted a dispatch must notify the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher in the proper
manner:
      (1)   What time the driver has arrived at the pickup location, and what
time the meter was turned on;
      (2)   Whether the Driver has picked up any Passengers;
      (3)   If the Passenger did not show, what time the Vehicle left the
location; and
      (4)   When the trip is completed.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-10(e)
 
   (f)   Assist with payment. Upon a Passenger's request, the Driver must
assist Passenger with completing payment, such as helping the Passenger to
access the credit card reader and counting cash aloud.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
53-10(f)
 
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024)
Chapter 54: Drivers of Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries [Repealed]
§ 54-01 Scope of This Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-02 Penalties. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-03 Definitions Specific to This Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-04 Licensing – Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-04.1 Licensing – Authorization to Drive a Street Hail Livery. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-04.2 Licensing – FHV Driver Authorization to Drive a Street Hail Livery.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-05 Licensing – Probationary Licenses. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 54-06 Licensing – Term of License. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-07 Licensing – Fees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-08 Licensing – Process and Causes for Denial. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-09 Licensing – Transfer of License. [Repealed] [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-10 Licensing – Care and Use of License. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-11 Comply with Laws – Unlicensed Activity Prohibited. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-13 Comply with Laws – Traffic Laws & Miscellaneous. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-14 Operations – Passenger and Driver Safety. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/20/2016, eff. 10/20/2016; repealed City
Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-15 Operations – General Rules During Operation of Vehicle. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-16 Operations – Comply with Reasonable Passenger Requests. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-17 Operations – Rates, Charges and Payment. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-18 Operations – Lost Property. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-19 Operations – Passenger Solicitation and Engagement. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-20 Operations – Refusing Passengers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-21 Operations – Cooperation with Issuing Jurisdictions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-22 Vehicle – Operation and Condition. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-23 Vehicle – Items Required to be in the Vehicle. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-24 Vehicle – Trip Records. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-25 Vehicle Equipment – Taxicab Technology System (Electronic Trip Record
System) for Taxicabs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-25.1 Vehicle Equipment – Street Hail Livery Technology System (Electronic
Trip Record System) for Street Hail Liveries. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-26 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeters. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 54-27 Special Driver Penalty Programs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
Chapter 55: For-Hire Drivers [Repealed]
§ 55-01 Scope of This Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-02 Penalties. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-04 Licensing – Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-05 Licensing – Probationary Licenses. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-06 Licensing – Term of License. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-07 Licensing – Fees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-08 Licensing – Process and Causes for Denial of License. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-09 Licensing – Transfer of License. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-10 Licensing – Care and Use of License. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-11 Comply with Laws – Unlicensed Activity Prohibited. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-13 Comply with Laws – Traffic Laws. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-14 Operations – Passenger and Driver Safety. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/20/2016, eff. 10/20/2016; repealed City
Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-15 Operations – General Rules During Operation of Vehicle. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-16 Operations – Comply with Reasonable Passenger Requests. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-17 Operations – Method of Payment. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-18 Operations – Lost Property. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-19 Operations – Passenger and Solicitation and Engagement. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-20 Operations – Refusing Passengers. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-21 Operations – Rules for Drivers from Qualified Jurisdictions. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-22 Vehicle – Operating Conditions. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-23 Vehicle – Items Required to be in the Vehicle. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-24 Vehicle – Trip Records. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-25 Vehicle – Electronic Trip Record System. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-26 Vehicle – Miscellaneous. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-27 Special Driver Penalty Programs. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 55-28 Street Hail Liveries. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
Chapter 56: Paratransit Drivers
§ 56-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish procedures for the licensing and supervision of
Paratransit Drivers who operate for hire in the City of New York.
   (b)   To establish operating rules to protect the customers and the public.
   (c)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these Rules.
§ 56-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 of the Rules of the City of New York, in which case the payment of
the fines will be deferred until 30 days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Mandatory Penalties. If a Licensee has violated a Rule listed below,
or any combination of these Rules, the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH or,
if applicable, the Chairperson will enforce the following mandatory penalties
and fines:
 
Violation Description             Rule
1. Proper licensing               35 RCNY §
                                  56-11(a)    First Violation:
2. only Licensees can operate     35 RCNY §  $100-$350(i)
Paratransit Vehicles              56-11(d)(1)
3. refusal to serve               35 RCNY §  Second Violation within 24
                                  56-20(a)    months:
4. refusal to transport equipment 35 RCNY §  $350-$500
for passengers with disabilities  56-15(k)(1)
5. attempt to overcharge          35 RCNY §  Third Violation within 24 months:
additional fare to passengers     56-15(g)(1) Revocation of relevant License
6. can conduct prearranged        35 RCNY §  for Driver, base owner, or owner
service only                      56-19(a)    found in violation.
 
      (1)   The Commission can also suspend or revoke a Paratransit Driver's
License.
      (2)   The 24-month period referred to above will be counted backward from
the date of the most recent conviction.
      (3)   Any individual or Business Entity whose License has been revoked
will not be eligible for any Commission License for at least 1 year after
revocation.
      (4)   The Chairperson will automatically revoke the License of any
Licensee who has 5 or more summonses that remain open and outstanding for 12
months. The 12-month period will be counted from the date the earliest summons
was issued.
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 56-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Paratransit Driver's License.
   (b)   Application in this chapter refers to an application for a Paratransit
Driver's License including all documentation and other information submitted as
part of the application.
   (c)   Chauffeur's License. As used herein, Chauffeur's License shall mean:
      (1)   A Valid New York driver's license Class A, B, C or E; or
      (2)   A Valid license of similar class from another state of which the
licensee is a resident.
   (d)   Driver when used alone in this Chapter refers to a Paratransit Driver.
   (e)   Driver's License (or License). In this Chapter, any reference to
"Driver's License" or "License" (when used alone) will refer to a Paratransit
Driver's License.
   (f)   Paratransit Disability. A person with a Paratransit Disability is an
individual with a physical or mental impairment, including any person with a
mobility impairment who uses a wheelchair, three-wheeled motorized scooter or
other mobility aid, or is semi-ambulatory, and who cannot board, ride or
disembark from a vehicle without the assistance of a wheelchair lift or other
boarding assistance device.
   (g)   Paratransit Vehicle (also known as a wheelchair accessible van). A
Paratransit Vehicle is any motor vehicle, equipped with a hydraulic lift or
ramp(s) designed for the purpose of transporting persons who use wheelchairs or
containing any other physical devices designed to permit access to and the
transportation of a person with a Paratransit Disability.
   (h)   Service Animal. A service animal is an animal that performs a task or
a specific set of tasks to assist a person with a disability.
   (i)   Vehicle when used alone in this Chapter refers to a Paratransit
Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 56-04 Licensing – Requirements.
   (a)   Age. An Applicant must be at least 18 years of age.
   (b)   Identification. If the Applicant is applying for an original License,
he or she must provide both of the following:
      (1)   A Valid Government photo ID
      (2)   A Valid social security number
   (c)   Chauffeur's License. An Applicant must hold a Valid Chauffeur's
License.
   (d)   Qualified "Bus Driver" Under Article 19-A. An Applicant for a
Paratransit Driver's License must meet the special requirements for bus drivers
under Article 19-A of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law.
   (e)   Fitness for the Job.
      (1)   The Applicant must be in sound mental and physical condition
      (2)   The Applicant's fitness must be certified by a licensed physician
on forms provided by the Commission or as part of Applicant's qualification
process under Article 19-A of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law.
      (3)   The Commission can, for good cause, require the Applicant to be
examined by a licensed physician chosen by the Commission.
      (4)   An existing License can be suspended or revoked if the Driver fails
to be examined as directed.
      (5)   The Applicant's vision must be tested and Applicants must possess
at least 20/40 vision in each eye (with corrective lenses if necessary).
      (6)   The Applicant must be of good moral character.
   (f)   Speak and Understand English. Applicants must be able to understand,
speak, read and write the English language.
   (g)   Familiar with Geography. Applicants must be familiar with New York
City geography, streets and traffic regulations, as well as New York State
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
   (h)   [Reserved.] Pass Drug Test.
   (i)   Fingerprinting and Tests. All Applicants must be fingerprinted, be
photographed and pass all tests administered or directed by the Commission.
   (j)   File Application. Applicants must personally sign and file their
application for a new or renewal Paratransit Driver's License.
   (k)   Agreement to Accept Service of Process. An Applicant agrees that the
City of New York can serve any notice or legal process of any kind upon the
Driver by leaving a copy with anyone who resides at the Mailing Address listed
on the Driver's application.
   (l)   Training.
      (1)   Defensive Driving Course.
         (i)   Applicants for a new Paratransit Driver's License must hold a
current certificate of completion that was issued no more than three years
prior to the application date for the required hours of instruction in a
Defensive Driving Course.
         (ii)   Applicants for a renewal Paratransit Driver's License must hold
a current certificate of completion that was issued no more than three years
prior to the application date for the required hours of instruction in a
Defensive Driving Course dated within three years prior to the date of the
renewal application.
   (m)   Unique Requirements/Exceptions for New York Police Officers. A member
of the New York City Police Department who applies for a Paratransit Driver's
License must satisfy all the normal requirements for the License and also
provide a letter to the Commission from his or her commanding officer approving
the application.
   (n)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (o)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and a current and valid E-mail Address.
   (p)   Material Changes in the Application. The Applicant must inform the
Chairperson of any material change in the information submitted as part of the
Application while the Application is pending. Material changes include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Changes in Applicant's Chauffeur's License status;
      (2)   Mailing address; additional criminal convictions;
      (3)   Additional DMV convictions, including convictions for the offense
of operating a motor vehicle while impaired by alcohol or drugs; or
      (4)   Any change to the information provided or submitted with the
Application.
   (q)   Summary of Driving Record. An Applicant whose driver's license has
been issued by a state other than New York or who has held a driver's license
issued by a state other than New York within the two years prior to the date of
the Application, must provide the Commission with an abstract of his or her
driving record from the state that issued the Applicant's driver's license,
dated no more than 90 days prior to the date of the Application, covering at
least the two years prior to the date of the Application.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 56-05 Licensing – Probationary Licenses.
[Reserved.]
§ 56-06 Licensing – Term of Licenses.
   (a)   Original (New) License Term. An original (new) Paratransit Driver's
License will be Valid for three years from the date it is issued.
   (b)   Renewal License Term. A License issued to a renewing Applicant will be
Valid for three years from the date that the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted less than 30 days before the expiration date may not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid and
cannot be used to drive a Vehicle after the License expiration date until the
application for renewal is approved by the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 180
days after the expiration date as a "late application," if the Applicant pays a
late fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid to drive a Vehicle until the application for renewal is
approved by the Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 180 days after the expiration
date.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 56-07 Licensing – License and Administrative Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a Paratransit Vehicle Driver's License
will be $84 annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original (new) or renewal License
must be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (d)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application, if it allows the filing at all.
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee
of $25 for each License it issues to replace a lost or mutilated License.
§ 56-08 Licensing – Process and Cause for Denial of License.
   (a)   Fit to Hold a License – Applicant. The Chairperson will deny the
original Paratransit License or renewal License of any Applicant who fails to
demonstrate that the Applicant is Fit to Hold a License. The Chairperson will
inform the Applicant, in writing, of the specific reason(s) for this denial.
The decision to deny a license Application is in the discretion of the
Chairperson.
   (b)   Fit to Hold a License – Licensee. If at any time the Chairperson is
notified that a Driver no longer meets the requirements for licensure, the
Chairperson can deny Driver's renewal application or may seek to suspend or
revoke his or her License.
   (c)   Denial of an Application. The Chairperson can reject or deny a new
Application for a License for the reasons specified in this section. If, at the
time of submission of an Application by the Applicant, the Chairperson
identifies that the Applicant meets the criteria in this section, the
Chairperson will reject the Application and no Application fees will be
accepted. If the Application is accepted by the Chairperson, no Application
fees will be refunded.
      (1)   Three-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous three years, the Applicant has committed:
         (i)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of driving a TLC licensed
vehicle while impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content), or Drugs.
         (ii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of bribery, fraud,
material misrepresentation, theft, threat against a person, harassment, abuse,
or use of physical force.
         (iii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, involving the
possession of a Weapon in a vehicle licensed under these Rules.
         (iv)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, resulting in the
revocation of a prior License, unless the prior License was revoked pursuant to
the mandatory penalties set forth in 35 RCNY §
80-02(e).
            1.   The three-year ban will apply if, while license revocation
charges were pending, a prior License expired or was surrendered to the
Chairperson.
            2.   Special Consideration for Persistent Violator Program
Revocations. After a minimum of one year from the date the Persistent Violator
summons is issued, an Applicant may request a waiver of the three-year ban from
the Chairperson. This request can only be made if the Applicant's driving
record reflects no more than three points for violations that occurred during
the three year period preceding the date of the request for the waiver.
      (2)   One-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous one year, the Applicant has committed:
         (i)   More than three traffic Collisions within a single year. The
one-year ban will be counted from the date of the last Collision.
         (ii)   The traffic infraction of unlicensed operation of a motor
vehicle.
         (iii)   Prior Application Denied. The Chairperson will deny an
Application that is submitted within one year after the submission of a prior
Application, if the previous Application was denied because the Applicant was
found not Fit to Hold a License. The one-year ban will be counted from the date
the prior application was submitted to the Commission.
         (iv)   Illegal use of Drugs, as determined by the Commission following
a drug test required by the Commission. This includes where the drug test
result was unchallenged or unsuccessfully challenged. The one-year ban will run
from the date of the failed drug test.
      (3)   Other Reasons for Denial of an Application.
         (i)   Mistake or Omission in the Application. The Chairperson can deny
an Application if the Application includes any material mistake or omission, or
if the Applicant fails to inform the Chairperson of any material change in the
Application.
         (ii)   Eligible for Persistent Violator Penalty. The Chairperson can
deny an Application if the Applicant would, if licensed, be subject to License
suspension or revocation under the Persistent Violator Program at the time the
Application is submitted.
            (1)   For purposes of this subparagraph, TLC will consider DMV
points accrued no earlier than 15 months prior to the date of the application
in order to determine whether the new applicant meets the standard for
suspension or revocation under the Persistent Violator Program.
         (iii)   Pendency of Criminal Charges. The Chairperson will defer
consideration of an Application if the Applicant has criminal charges pending.
If the charges are not resolved within 90 days after the submission of the
Application, the Application will be denied.
      (4)   Settlements. When settling charges which may result in the
revocation of a License, the Chairperson and the Respondent in that proceeding
may agree to a ban on applying for a new License different than that provided
for in these rules, provided that the agreement is in writing.
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an Application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an Application within
180 days after the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an Application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
Application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the Application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 56-09 Licensing – Transfer of License.
[Reserved.]
§ 56-10 Licensing – Care of License.
   (a)   No One Else Can Use. A Driver must not allow anyone to use his or her
Paratransit Driver's License. Drivers must not use another person's Paratransit
Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance REQUIRED
56-10(a)
 
   (b)   Suspension or Revocation of Chauffeur's License. A Driver must
immediately report the suspension or revocation of his or her New York State
Chauffeur’s License or the revocation of the driver’s New York State Driving
privileges to the Commission, and must then surrender his or her Paratransit
Driver’s License to the Commission
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15-$150 Appearance REQUIRED
56-10(b)
 
   (c)   Loss or Theft of License. A Driver must notify the Commission in
writing of the loss, theft or mutilation of his Paratransit Driver's License
within 72 hours of that loss (not counting weekends and holidays). A Driver
must report in person to apply for a replacement Paratransit Driver's License
and must be re-photographed.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-10(c)
 
   (d)   Unreadable License.
      (1)   A Driver must not do anything to any portion of his Paratransit
Driver's License or the attached photograph that would make the License
unreadable or the photograph unrecognizable.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-10(d)(1)
 
      (2)   A Driver must immediately surrender any unreadable, unrecognizable,
or mutilated Paratransit Driver's License to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-10(d)(2)
 
   (e)   Keep Photo Updated. A Driver must come to the Commission to be re-
photographed whenever his or her physical appearance has changed.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-10(e)
 
   (f)   Safeguarding Licenses.
      (1)   A Driver must safeguard his or her Paratransit Driver's License and
the Paratransit Vehicle License.
      (2)   Locking the Paratransit Vehicle with the Paratransit Driver's
License and Paratransit Vehicle License inside during his or her shift will
satisfy this rule.
      (3)   A Driver must not leave his or her Licenses in the Paratransit
Vehicle while another is in possession of the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-10(f)
 
   (g)   Surrender of License. A Driver must surrender his or her License to
the Commission immediately upon revocation of the License. The License must be
surrendered within thirty days of the date of revocation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 to be paid if Driver applies for a new Appearance N/A
56-10(g)    License of any type.
 
(Amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 56-11 Comply with Laws – Unlicensed Activity Prohibited.
   (a)   Vehicle Must be Licensed. A Driver must not operate a paratransit
vehicle for hire within the City of New York, unless it is properly licensed by
the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-11(a)    56-02
 
   (b)   Driver Must be Licensed. A driver of a New York City Paratransit
Vehicle for hire must be licensed as a Paratransit Driver by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: First Violation: $1,500
56-11(b)    Second Violation in 36 months: $2,000 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Third Violation: revocation.
 
   (c)   Driver Must Have Valid Chauffeur's License. A Driver must not operate
a Paratransit Vehicle unless he or she possesses a Valid Chauffeur's License.
The License of a Driver who operates a Paratransit Vehicle without a Valid
Chauffer's License will be summarily suspended. A Driver must not operate a
Paratransit Vehicle if the Driver’s driving privileges in New York State have
been suspended or revoked.
 
            Fine: First Violation: $350 and Suspension
35 RCNY §  until compliance.
56-11(c)    Second Violation in 36 months: $500 and    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Suspension until compliance.
            Third Violation: revocation.
 
   (d)   Driver Must Not Permit Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   A Driver must not permit any individual who is not currently
licensed by the Commission to operate the Paratransit Vehicle in which he or
she is dispatched, unless directed to do so by the owner or his or her agents.
 
35 RCNY §  MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-11(d)(1) 56-02
 
   (e)   Vehicle Must be Insured. A Driver must not operate a Paratransit
Vehicle unless the vehicle is adequately insured in accordance with New York
State Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
56-11(e)
 
   (f)   A driver who operates as a licensee after the expiration date of a
License and before the renewal License has been issued is engaged in Unlicensed
Activity.
   (g)   Driver Must Not Drive with a Suspended or Revoked Paratransit License.
A driver must not operate a Paratransit Vehicle in New York City while his
Paratransit Driver's License is revoked, suspended or expired.
 
            Fine:
35 RCNY §  $100 – 1st Offense                               Appearance
56-11(g)    $250 – 2nd Offense                               REQUIRED
            $350 – 3rd Offense
            Revocation – 4 or more offenses within 12 months
 
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 56-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   No Bribery. An Applicant or Driver (or anyone representing the Driver)
must not offer or give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee,
representative or member of the Commission or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(a)
 
   (b)   Report Request for Bribe. A Driver must immediately report to the
Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value from
him or his representative by any employee, representative or member of the
Commission or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(b)    revocation
 
   (c)   No Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Driver must not commit or attempt to commit, any act of fraud,
misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350-$1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(c)    days or revocation
 
   (d)   No Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150-$350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(d)    or revocation
 
   (e)   No Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with any other, any act that is against the best
interests of the public although not specifically mentioned in these rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150-$350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(e)    or revocation
 
   (f)   Notify of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Driver must notify the Commission within 15 calendar days after
the Driver is convicted of any crime.
      (2)   The Driver must deliver to the Commission a certified copy of the
certificate issued by the clerk of the court explaining what happened as a
result of the conviction, within 15 days of sentencing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
56-12(f)    hearing; $250 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (g)   Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Driver must answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives, and summonses issued by the Commission or its
representatives.
      (2)   A Driver must produce any licenses, Trip Records, or other
documents required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(g)(1)(2)
 
      (3)   (i)   A Driver must report any change of Mailing Address and E-mail
Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-12(g)(3)(i)
 
         (ii)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to
the last Mailing Address provided by the Driver.
   (h)   Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Driver must cooperate with all law
enforcement officers and all authorized representatives of the Commission.
Cooperation includes, but is not limited to, responding to a request for the
Driver's name, License number, and any documents Driver is required to have in
his or her possession.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
56-12(h)    hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (i)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Driver must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person or distract or attempt to distract any Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(i)    days
 
   (j)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Driver must not use or attempt to use any
physical force against a person or Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(j)    days or revocation.
 
   (k)   No Unlawful Purpose. A Driver must not use or permit another person to
use his or her Paratransit Vehicle for any unlawful purpose and must
immediately report to the police any criminal use or attempted criminal use
involving the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(k)    days
 
   (l)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-12(l)
 
   (m)   Sexual Harassment. While performing the duties and responsibilities of
a Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in the sexual harassment of any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and mandatory suspension of 30
56-12(m)    days and/or revocation.                     Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
   (n)   Sexual Contact. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in sexual contact with any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,000 and mandatory revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
56-12(n)
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 56-13 Comply with Laws – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Traffic Laws. A Driver must comply with all applicable traffic laws,
rules and regulations. The Commission will impose fines and penalties in
addition to any fines and penalties imposed by the underlying law as follows:
      (1)   Laws, rules or regulations governing stationary vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
56-13(a)(1) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles, other than
hazardous moving violations defined by paragraph (3) of this subdivision.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
56-13(a)(2) hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (3)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles that involve
hazardous moving violations, defined as follows:
         •   speeding;
         •   failing to stop for school bus;
         •   following too closely (tailgating);
         •   inadequate brakes, either your own vehicle or your employer's
vehicle;
         •   failing to yield right-of-way;
         •   traffic signal violation;
         •   stop sign violation;
         •   yield sign violation;
         •   railroad crossing violation;
         •   improper passing;
         •   unsafe lane change;
         •   driving left of center;
         •   driving in wrong direction; and
         •   leaving scene of a Collision involving property damage or injury
to animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
56-13(a)(3) hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing, for each violation below.
 
   (b)   Persistent Violator Program. In addition to any other action the
Commission might take, the following penalties will be enforced as part of the
Commission's Persistent Violator Program:
      (1)   License Suspension. If, within a 15-month period, a Driver
accumulates a total of at least six but fewer than ten TLC Points or DMV Points
or both combined, the Commission will suspend the Driver's Paratransit Driver's
License for up to 30 days.
      (2)   License Revocation. If, within a 15-month period, a Driver
accumulates a total of ten or more TLC Points or DMV Points or both combined,
the Commission will revoke the Driver's Paratransit Driver's License.
      (3)   Review of Driver Fitness. The Commission can at any time review the
fitness of a Driver to continue to be licensed following any moving violation,
Collision, or other driving-related incident and can seek to impose other,
additional, and/or more severe penalties or take any other action permitted
under these Rules.
      (4)   15-Month Period. When determining whether a suspension or
revocation is required based on the accumulation of points in a 15-month
period, the Commission will calculate the 15-month period by counting backwards
15 months from the date of the most recent conviction for the violation
carrying points that is cited in the summons issued under this section.
      (5)   Date of Point Accumulation. For the purpose of this rule, points
assigned by the Department of Motor Vehicles or the TLC for any violation will
be counted as of the date of conviction.
      (6)   Multiple Points from a Single Incident. For a Driver who has been
found guilty of multiple violations arising from a single incident, the
Commission will consider the Driver guilty of the single violation with the
highest point total for purposes of this section.
      (7)   Point Reduction for Voluntary Course Completion. 
         (i)   Before suspending or revoking a Driver's License, the Commission
will deduct three TLC Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who
voluntarily attends and satisfactorily completes a Point Reduction Course or
three DMV Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who voluntarily
attends and satisfactorily completes a Defensive Driving Course. Such point
reduction will count only towards points accumulated by the Licensee as a
result of the conviction for violations that occurred within 15 months prior to
the date of the completion of the course, counting from the date of conviction.
In order for the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction Course to reduce
the Licensee's Persistent Violator Program points, the course must be
satisfactorily completed prior to the adjudication of the Persistent Violator
summons. Completion of the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction Course
after the adjudication of a Persistent Violator Program summons will reduce the
Licensee's Persistent Violator Program points only after the Licensee completes
his or her suspension. If the Licensee's driver's license was issued by a state
other than New York, the Licensee must submit a recent driving abstract from
the state of licensure.
         (ii)   The Driver must furnish the Commission with proof when the
course was taken and that the course was satisfactorily completed before the
Commission will reduce the Driver's point total.
         (iii)   If the Commission has already suspended or revoked the
Driver's License, the point reduction will not change the Commission's
decision.
         (iv)   The Commission will not reduce the TLC Points of any Driver
more than once in any five-year period and will not reduce the DMV Points of
any Driver more than once in any 18-month period.
         (v)   If no Point Reduction Course is available when the Driver seeks
to enroll, the Driver may take a Defensive Driving Course. After the Driver
furnishes the Commission with proof that the course was satisfactorily
completed, the TLC will deduct three points from the number of points accrued
under the Persistent Violator Program whether such points are TLC Points or DMV
Points.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 56-14 Operations – Passenger and Driver Safety.
   (a)   [Reserved.]
   (b)   Reckless Driving Rule. A Driver must not operate a Paratransit Vehicle
in a manner or speed that unreasonably endangers users of other vehicles,
pedestrians, or the Passengers.
 
            Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30
35 RCNY §  days or revocation if Driver is found guilty of Appearance REQUIRED
56-14(b)    having violated this rule more than three times
            within an 18-month period.
 
   (c)   Report Before Leaving Scene.
      (1)   A Driver who knows or should have known that a Collision involving
the Driver's Paratransit Vehicle resulted in personal injury to another or
damage to another's property, must stop before leaving the scene of the
Collision, and if the other involved party is present, must:
         (i)   Show his or her Chauffeur's License, Paratransit Driver's
License, and Vehicle License to the party sustaining the damage.
         (ii)   Give the other involved party his or her name, Chauffeur's
License number, the Vehicle owner's name, the affiliated Base name and
telephone number, Paratransit Driver's License number, and Vehicle License
number, as well as the name of the Vehicle's insurance carrier and the
insurance policy number.
 
            Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days or
35 RCNY §  revocation if Driver is found guilty of having  Appearance REQUIRED
56-14(c)(1) violated this rule more than three times within
            a 12-month period.
 
      (2)   Notify Paratransit Vehicle Owner of Collision. If the Driver is
involved in a Collision, the Driver must immediately report the Collision to
the owner of the Paratransit Vehicle and to the affiliated Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-14(c)(2)
 
   (d)   Driving While Impaired. A Driver must not operate a Paratransit
Vehicle if his or her driving ability is impaired by either alcohol or Drugs. A
Driver must not consume alcoholic beverages or Drugs while occupying the
vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $300 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
56-14(d)    revocation.
 
   (e)   [Reserved.] TLC can Require Drug Test.
   (f)   Not Allowed to Drive More than 12 Consecutive Hours. A Driver must not
operate a Paratransit Vehicle for more than 12 consecutive hours. If a Driver
has accepted a passenger prior to the conclusion of the twelfth hour the Driver
can complete that trip provided he or she is able to drive safely.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-14(f)
 
   (g)   Handling Passengers with Infectious Diseases.
      (1)   Drivers must obey any Federal, State or City laws and regulations
regarding the handling of passengers with infectious diseases. This includes
providing passengers with things such as masks and gloves when required.
      (2)   Drivers must adhere to any Federal, State or City laws and
regulations regarding cleaning Paratransit Vehicles after transporting
passengers with infectious diseases and the disposal of contaminated materials.
It is the responsibility of the owner of the Paratransit Vehicle to provide
protective clothing (goggles, gloves, gowns and masks) to any employee who
disinfects the vehicle.
         (i)   The New York State Department of Health has recommended the
following as an appropriate disinfectant solution: One (1) part sodium
hypochlorite solution (bleach) to nine (9) parts water – fill the bucket with
water first and then add the solution.
         (ii)   If a stretcher is contaminated, it can be cleaned and
disinfected by wiping. If it is saturated, however, Drivers (or owners) are
required to dispose of it in an appropriate manner. The Driver (or owner) must
dispose of any contaminated linen. Note: Dispose of contaminated material by
placing the items in a buff-colored impervious plastic bag and seal the bag and
tag it as "contaminated" and dispose of the material in the manner approved at
a local hospital.
         (iii)   In the case of gross contamination, where the vehicle is
saturated or encrusted, then the vehicle must be sterilized with steam, gas or
liquid agents.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $1,000 possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
56-14(g)    revocation (OATH).
 
   (h)   Collision Notification. 
      (1)   A Driver must immediately notify the Vehicle owner if the Driver
and the Paratransit Vehicle are involved in a Collision.
      (2)   A Driver must immediately notify his or her employer of any traffic
infraction, Collision or conviction as required in section 509-i of Article 19A
of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $250 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
56-14(h)    days
 
   (i)   Use of an Electronic Communication Device.
      (1)   A Driver must not Use an Electronic Communication Device while
operating a Vehicle. A Driver can Use an Electronic Communication Device only
while the Vehicle is lawfully standing or parked.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
56-14(i)(1) hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided above for any violation of
this Rule, a Driver convicted of a violation of this Rule must complete a
Distracted Driving Course no later than 60 days after the date of conviction.
The license of a Driver who does not complete the Distracted Driving Course
within the 60 day period will be suspended until compliance. Penalty:
Suspension until compliance if course not completed within 60 days of the date
of conviction. The Driver must provide proof that the course was completed.
      (3)   Affirmative Defense. A Driver can offer an affirmative defense to a
charge of Using an Electronic Communication Device under this Rule if all of
the following are true:
         (i)   The communication was to an emergency response operator;
         (ii)   The communication reports an imminent threat to life or
property;
         (iii)   The Driver could not safely stop the Vehicle to make the
report; and
         (iv)   The Driver provides documentary proof of communication with an
emergency response provider.
   (j)   Serious Crashes. A serious crash is one in which any person has
suffered Critical Injury or death. "Critical Injury," for purposes of this
section, means any injury determined to be critical by the emergency medical
service personnel responding to such crash.
      (i)   If a Driver has been issued a summons for or charged with one or
more traffic related violations or crimes in a Serious Crash, the Driver's
License may be Summarily Suspended, upon a finding that the Driver's conduct
was a substantial cause of the Serious Crash. Upon conviction of the Driver of
one or more of the violations or crimes stated in the summons or charges and
upon a determination that one or more of the violations or crimes for which
conviction occurred was a cause of Critical Injury or death, the Driver's
License will be revoked. A Summary Suspension pursuant to this section may be
lifted pursuant to this Title or upon dismissal of all such charges or upon a
finding of not guilty of all of the stated traffic related violations and
crimes, except that the Chairperson may continue to suspend the license
pursuant to an investigation into the Driver's fitness, and such license may be
revoked if the Driver is found not Fit to Hold a License (see subdivision
(ii)). This section does not limit in any way the Chairperson's authority to
Summarily Suspend a Driver for other reasons.
      (ii)   After any Serious Crash of which the TLC is notified involving a
Driver operating a Licensed Vehicle, the TLC will review whether the Driver is
Fit to Hold a License under 35 RCNY §
56-08(b). The TLC can seek Suspension or Revocation of the Driver's License and
can Summarily Suspend the Driver's License while any fitness review or
enforcement action is pending, in accordance with 35 RCNY §
68-15.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 56-15 Operations – General Rules During Operation of Vehicle.
   (a)   No Weapons. A Driver must not carry a weapon while operating a
Paratransit Vehicle without the Commission's written authorization.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and/or suspension up to 30 days. Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(a)
 
   (b)   Driver Neat & Clean. A Driver must be clean and neat in dress and
person and present a professional appearance.
   (c)   No Smoking. A Driver must not smoke when transporting a passenger, or
while assisting the passenger in or out of the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: No Penalty Noted. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-15(c)
 
   (d)   [Reserved.] No Locking Rear Doors.
   (e)   [Reserved.]
   (f)   [Reserved.] Have E-Z Pass.
   (g)   No Overcharges.
      (1)   A Driver must not charge or try to charge a fare above the approved
rate of fare established by the owner and filed with the Commission.
      (2)   A Driver must not charge or try to charge any additional fees for
transporting a person with a Paratransit Disability, a Service Animal, or a
wheelchair or other mobility aid.
 
35 RCNY §      MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(g)(1)-(2) 56-02
 
      (3)   A Driver must give passengers the correct change.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $150. Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(g)(3)
 
      (4)   A Driver must not ask or in any way indicate to a passenger that a
tip is expected or required.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50. Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(g)(4)
 
   (h)   [Reserved.] Non-Paying Customers.
   (i)   No Overloading Vehicle. A Driver must never carry more passengers than
the capacity of the vehicle as determined by the State Department of
Transportation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-15(i)
 
   (j)   [Reserved.] Use of Front Seat.
   (k)   Luggage.
      (1)   A Driver must not refuse to transport a passenger's wheelchair,
crutches or other property.
 
35 RCNY §  MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(k)(1) 56-02
 
      (2)   When necessary or if the passenger requests it, the Driver must
load or unload the passenger's luggage and other property, within reason.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50-$100. Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(k)(2)
 
   (l)   [Reserved.] No Transporting Property Only.
   (m)   No "Marketing" to Passengers. A Driver must not sell or advertise any
service or merchandise to the passengers without prior written approval from
the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-15(m)
 
   (n)   Assist Passengers to Board Vehicle.
      (1)   A Driver must provide all necessary and reasonable assistance to
passengers to board the vehicle, to be secured inside, to be delivered to their
destination, and to depart from the vehicle.
      (2)   The Driver must assist all passengers whether the passenger is
ambulatory, or uses a wheelchair or other mobility aid.
      (3)   The Driver's assistance must also include ensuring that a service
animal has entered and exited the vehicle.
      (4)   The Driver is not required to assist passengers up or down the
steps.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 - $340 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(n)(1)-(4) 30 days and possible revocation (OATH).
 
   (o)   Be Punctual. A Driver must be diligent and on time in picking up and
transporting passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-15(o)
 
   (p)   Find Alternate Transportation if Vehicle Breaks Down.
      (1)   If the Paratransit Vehicle becomes inoperable while a passenger is
in the Vehicle, the Driver must try to find comparable transportation for the
remainder of the passenger's trip.
      (2)   This does not apply if the passenger wants to find his or her own
transportation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $150. Appearance REQUIRED
56-15(p)
 
   (q)   Courtesy. A Driver must be courteous to passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
56-15(q)    hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
§ 56-16 Operations – Comply with Reasonable Passenger Requests.
   (a)   Shortest Route. A Driver must take passengers to their destination by
the shortest, most reasonable route unless the Driver or passenger requests a
different route, and all of the other passengers agree.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $150. Appearance REQUIRED
56-16(a)
 
   (b)   Request to Change Destination or Terminate. A Driver must comply with
a passenger's request to change the destination or terminate the trip unless it
is impossible or unsafe for the Driver to comply. The passenger can not request
this change in an emergency situation, and any change or termination must be in
the best interest of the other passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $150. Appearance REQUIRED
56-16(b)
 
   (c)   Request for Driver's Name, License Number. A Driver must comply with
all lawful and reasonable requests from passengers. This can include giving his
or her name, his or her Paratransit Driver's License number and the Paratransit
Vehicle's license number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $100. Appearance REQUIRED
56-16(c)
 
   (d)   Request for Receipt.
      (1)   Upon request, the Driver must give a passenger a receipt for
payment of the fare.
      (2)   The receipt must clearly show the date, time, Paratransit Vehicle
license plate number, name of the Base, fare paid, extras, and the telephone
number of the Commission's complaint department.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-16(d)
 
   (e)   Passenger Requests on Audio.
      (1)   A Driver must turn the radio on or off at the passenger's request.
      (2)   The passenger has the right to select the radio station.
      (3)   The radio volume will only be played at a reasonable level, and the
Driver must abide by all noise ordinances.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-16(e)
 
   (f)   Passenger Request Regarding Air Conditioning/Heat. A Driver must turn
the air conditioning or heating device in a Paratransit Vehicle on or off at a
passenger's request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-16(f)
 
§ 56-17 Operations – Method of Payment.
   (a)   [Reserved.] Accept U.S. Currency.
   (b)   Be Able to Make Change. A Driver must always be capable of making
change for a $20 bill when providing service on a cash basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-17(b)
 
   (c)   [Reserved.] Credit/debit Card with Operable TPEP.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 56-18 Operations – Lost Property.
   (a)   Inspecting for Passenger Property. The Driver must inspect the
interior of the Paratransit Vehicle after each trip and any property found must
be returned to the passenger if possible; otherwise it must be taken
immediately to the police precinct closest to where the passenger was
discharged.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250. Appearance REQUIRED
56-18(a)
 
   (b)   Inform Commission of Lost Property. The Driver must promptly inform
the Commission of any property found and the police precinct where it is held
if the property is not returned to the passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-18(b)
 
§ 56-19 Operations – Passenger Solicitation and Engagement.
   (a)   Limitations on Driver Solicitation of Passengers. A Driver must only
pick up passengers on a prearranged basis. Paratransit Drivers must not solicit
or respond to hails.
 
35 RCNY §  MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-19(a)    56-02
 
§ 56-20 Operations – Refusing Passengers.
   (a)   Must Not Refuse. Unless justified, a Driver who is dispatched must not
refuse by words, gestures or any other means, to transport a person who has
prearranged the trip with a destination within the City of New York. This
includes a passenger accompanied by a service animal.
 
35 RCNY §  MANDATORY PENALTIES: See 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
56-20(a)    56-02
 
   (b)   Justification for Refusal. The following are justifiable grounds for
refusing to provide transportation services:
      (1)   The passenger has a weapon.
      (2)   The passenger has a package or some article that the Driver
reasonably believes could injure others or damage the Paratransit Vehicle.
      (3)   The passenger is intoxicated or disorderly. (A Driver will not,
however, refuse to provide service solely because of behavior caused by a
person's disability.)
      (4)   The passenger is accompanied by an animal which is not properly or
adequately secured in a kennel case or other suitable container. This provision
will not apply to service animals accompanying people with disabilities.
      (5)   The passenger is in need of emergency medical assistance.
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 56-21 Operations – Cooperation with Issuing Jurisdictions.
[Reserved.]
§ 56-22 Vehicles – Operation and Condition of Vehicle.
   (a)   Pollution Control.
      (1)   The Driver will not unnecessarily allow the Vehicle's engine to
idle for longer than three minutes.
      (2)   The Driver will adhere to the New York City Air Pollution Control
Code.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-22(a)
 
   (b)   Inspect Condition. A Driver must personally inspect and reasonably
determine that all equipment, including brakes, tires, lights, signals,
wheelchair ramps and fastening devices are in good working order, before
operating the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 - $150. Appearance REQUIRED
56-22(b)
 
   (c)   [Reserved.] No On-street Maintenance Other than Emergency.
   (d)   Clean Interior. A Driver must keep the Paratransit Vehicle clean and
in good appearance during his or her work shift.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-22(d)
 
   (e)   No Unauthorized Equipment. Drivers must not put any unauthorized
equipment, devices or signs on or in a Paratransit Vehicle during their work
shifts (excluding mobility devices, such as grab bars, or non-slip flooring).
Drivers can install devices or equipment not listed here only with the written
authorization of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $200 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
56-22(e)    days.
 
§ 56-23 Vehicles – Items Required to be in the Vehicle During Operation.
   (a)   General. The following items must be present in the Paratransit
Vehicle prior to its operation:
      (1)   The Driver's Paratransit Driver's License.
      (2)   The Vehicle's registration certificate (or a photocopy).
      (3)   The Paratransit Vehicle License (or a photocopy).
      (4)   An insurance card (or a photocopy).
      (5)   The lease card, if any, (or a photocopy).
      (6)   The Trip Record.
      (7)   Any notices required to be posted in the Paratransit Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 each violation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-23(a)
 
§ 56-24 Vehicles – Trip Records.
   (a)   Information Required in Trip Records. All Trip Records will contain
the following information:
      (1)   The Driver's Paratransit Driver's License number
      (2)   The Paratransit Vehicle's state license plate number
      (3)   The date and time of pick-up of each passenger
      (4)   The date and time of drop-off of each passenger
      (5)   The locations of pick-ups and drop-offs
      (6)   Any other entries required by the Commission and local, state or
federal law.
      (7)   When the electronic Trip Record system is operable, the Driver will
use the system to record entries for the locations, dates and time of pick-ups
and drop-offs, at the times they occur; the Base Owner is permitted to make all
other entries.
 
            Fine: $50 for each violation of this rule;
35 RCNY §  however, no fine for a violation of this   Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-24(a)    rule will exceed $100 for each vehicle
            stop.
 
   (b)   Electronic Trip Record System.
      (1)   An electronic Trip Record system must be installed and functioning
in each Paratransit Vehicle.
      (2)   If the electronic system malfunctions, the Driver:
         (i)   Must report the malfunction promptly,
         (ii)   Must use a written Trip Record temporarily, and
         (iii)   Must not operate the Paratransit Vehicle for hire for more
than three business days after timely reporting the malfunction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250. Appearance REQUIRED
56-24(b)
 
   (c)   Maintaining Written Trip Records When Electronic System is Inoperable.
The written Trip Record must contain each of the record entries required under
35 RCNY §
56-24(a) above and must be maintained as follows:
      (1)   All entries must be in ink and the Trip Record must be current.
      (2)   At the beginning of each work shift the Driver will sign and
certify on the Trip Record that the Paratransit Vehicle and its equipment are
in good working condition and that all required items are present. (One entry
for an owner/Driver is sufficient.)
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 for each violation of this Rule;
56-24(c)    however, no fine shall exceed $100 for each Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Vehicle stop.
 
   (d)   Correcting Trip Records Entries. The only method of correcting errors
in written trip records is as follows:
      (1)   Drivers must correct errors by written Trip Records by drawing a
single line through the incorrect entry and initialing the correction.
      (2)   A Driver must not erase, smear, cross out or otherwise cover an
entry on a written Trip Record, and must not leave any blank lines between
entries.
      (3)   No one may erase, delete, alter, change or obliterate electronic
Trip Record data collected in the Paratransit Vehicle.
      (4)   A Driver must report all necessary corrections to the Base owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
56-24(d)
 
§ 56-25 Vehicle Equipment – Electronic Trip Record System.
   (a)   The "electronic Trip Record system" is hardware and software that
collects and stores the electronic trip record data required by the Commission.
This includes the following:
      (1)   The Driver's Paratransit Driver's License number
      (2)   The Paratransit Vehicle's state license plate number
      (3)   The date and time of pick-up of passengers
      (4)   The date and time of drop-off of passengers
      (5)   The locations of pick-ups and drop-offs
      (6)   Any other entries required by the Commission and local, state or
federal law.
   (b)   The specific pick-up and drop-off locations, dates and times must be
collected in the vehicle during the trip; the Base Owner is permitted to make
other entries.
§ 56-26 Vehicle Equipment – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Wheelchair Ramps and Fastening Devices. A Driver must only use
wheelchair ramps and fastening devices that are functioning properly and are
secure.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $250 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
56-26(a)    days.
 
§ 56-27 Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
   (a)   Authorization.
      (1)   A Paratransit Driver who holds a Valid Paratransit Driver's License
is authorized to drive an Accessible Street Hail Livery.
   (b)   Must Comply with 35 RCNY
Chapter 80. The holder of a Valid Paratransit Driver's License must comply with
all requirements for operation of an Accessible Street Hail Livery as set forth
in 35 RCNY
Chapter 80 while operating an Accessible Street Hail Livery. A Driver operating
an Accessible Street Hail Livery can be found liable for violating the
requirements of 35 RCNY
Chapter 80.
   (c)   Special Penalty Programs. Any points accumulated under 35 RCNY
Chapter 80 by a Paratransit Driver while operating an Accessible Street Hail
Livery will count towards and be applied to the Driver's Paratransit Driver's
License. A Paratransit Driver's License can be suspended or revoked as provided
in 35 RCNY §
80-27 as if it were a TLC Driver License.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
Chapter 57: Commuter Van Drivers
§ 57-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish procedures for the licensing and regulation of Commuter
Van Drivers who operate for hire into, out of or within New York City.
   (b)   To establish operating rules to protect the customers and the public.
   (c)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these rules.
§ 57-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they will be shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also
states whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Mandatory Penalties.
      (1)   The following cumulative violations will result in mandatory
revocation:
 
                                                                                                     Penalty,
Section     Topic       Cumulative Violation Criteria                                                after
                                                                                                     opportunity
                                                                                                     for Hearing
35 RCNY §  Pick Up and                                                                              Revocation
57-19(b)    Discharging Failure to comply three or more times within six months                      of Drivers
            Passengers                                                                               License
            Use or
35 RCNY §  attempt to                                                                               Revocation
57-12(c)    use         Failure to comply three or more times within six months                      of Drivers
            physical                                                                                 License
            force
            Suspension
            of license  Driver's license is suspended under Article 19-A § 509-c(2)(d) twice within Revocation
35 RCNY §  under "Bus  a three year period, for accumulating nine or more points within an 18-month of Drivers
57-11(c)    Driver"     period                                                                       License
            Driver
            Rules
 
      (2)   A Driver who has had his or her License revoked under any of these
mandatory penalties is not permitted to apply for a new License for a period of
one year after the date of revocation
§ 57-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Commuter Van Driver's License.
   (b)   Application in this chapter refers to an application for a Commuter
Van Driver's License including all documentation and other information
submitted as part of the application.
   (c)   Authorized means that a Commuter Van Service has been given permission
to operate by the Commission.
   (d)   Commuter Van Driver's License means a License to drive a Commuter Van
Vehicle.
   (e)   Commuter Van Vehicle. A motor vehicle having a seating capacity of at
least nine (9) but not more than twenty (20) passengers that has been licensed
by the TLC to carry passengers for hire in an Authorized Commuter Van Service.
   (f)   Commuter Van Service. A service that is Authorized by the Commission
to use Commuter Vans to provide transportation into, out of, or within New York
City:
      (1)   on a prearranged, regular daily basis,
      (2)   over non-specified or irregular routes, and
      (3)   between a zone in a residential neighborhood and a location which
will be a work related central location, a mass transit or mass transportation
facility, a shopping center, recreational facility or airport.
   (g)   Driver in this Chapter refers to a Commuter Van Driver.
   (h)   License in this Chapter means a Commuter Van Driver's License.
   (i)   Person with a Disability is an individual with a physical or mental
disability, including a person who uses a wheelchair, crutches, three-wheeled
motorized scooter, other mobility aid, or has a Service Animal, but who can
transfer from such a mobility aid to a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Commuter
Van with or without reasonable assistance.
   (j)   Service Animal. An animal that performs a task or a specific set of
tasks to assist a person with a disability.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 57-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Identification.
   (c)   Chauffeur's License. An Applicant must hold a Valid Chauffeur's
License.
   (d)   Qualified "Bus Driver" Under Article 19-A. An Applicant for a Commuter
Van Driver's License must:
      (1)   Meet the qualifications of Article 19-A of the NYS Vehicle and
Traffic Laws for the operation of a bus, as that article defines "bus," and
      (2)   Submit a copy of the affidavit filed with the NYS Department of
Motor Vehicles certifying that the driver has done so.
   (e)   Fitness for the Job. The Applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commission that he or she is fit and able to drive the
Commuter Van for which the License is sought.
   (f)   Familiar with Geography. An Applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commission that he or she is familiar with the geography
and streets of the area in which he or she intends to operate a Commuter Van.
   (g)   [Reserved.] Pass Drug Test.
   (h)   Fingerprinting for Determining Good Moral Character.
      (1)   The Applicant must be fingerprinted so that the Commission can
obtain criminal history records from the New York State Division of Criminal
Justice Services.
      (2)   The Applicant must pay any processing fee required by the State.
   (i)   [Reserved.] Agreement to Accept Service of Process.
   (j)   Training.
      (1)   Defensive Driving Course.
         (i)   Applicants for a new Commuter Van Driver's License must hold a
current certificate of completion that was issued no more than three years
prior to the application date for the required hours of instruction in a
Defensive Driving Course.
         (ii)   Applicants for a renewal Commuter Van Driver's License must
hold a current certificate of completion that was issued no more than three
years prior to the application date for the required hours of instruction in a
Defensive Driving Course dated within three years prior to the date of the
renewal application.
   (k)   [Reserved.] Unique Requirements/Exceptions for NY Police Officers.
   (l)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (m)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and a current and valid E-mail Address.
   (n)   Material Changes in the Application. The Applicant must inform the
Chairperson of any material change in the information submitted as part of the
Application while the Application is pending. Material changes include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Changes in Applicant's Chauffeur's License status;
      (2)   Mailing address;
      (3)   Additional criminal convictions;
      (4)   Additional DMV convictions, including convictions for the offense
of operating a motor vehicle while impaired by alcohol or drugs; or
      (5)   Any change to the information provided or submitted with the
Application.
   (o)   Summary of Driving Record. An Applicant whose driver's license has
been issued by a state other than New York or who has held a driver's license
issued by a state other than New York within the two years prior to the date of
the Application, must provide the Commission with an abstract of his or her
driving record from the state that issued the Applicant's driver's license,
dated no more than 90 days prior to the date of the Application, covering at
least the two years prior to the date of the Application.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 57-05 Licensing – Probationary Licenses.
[Reserved.]
§ 57-06 Licensing – Term of Licenses.
   (a)   Original (new) License Term. An original Commuter Van Driver's License
will be Valid for three years from the date it is issued.
   (b)   Renewal License Term. A License issued to a renewing Applicant will be
Valid for three years from the date that the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date may not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid and
cannot be used to drive a Vehicle after the License expiration date until the
application for renewal is approved by the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 180
days after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a
late fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid to drive a Vehicle until the application for renewal is
approved by the Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 180 days after the expiration
date.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (c) of this section to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 57-07 Licensing – License and Administrative Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a Commuter Van Driver's License will be
$84 annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid when the Applicant files the application.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves an application.
   (d)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application, if it allows the filing at all.
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee
of $25 for each License it issues to replace a lost or mutilated License.
§ 57-08 Licensing – Procedures and Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Fit to Hold a License – Applicant. The Chairperson will deny the
original or renewal License of any Applicant who fails to demonstrate that they
are Fit to Hold a License. The Chairperson will inform the Applicant, in
writing, of the specific reason(s) for this denial. The decision to deny a
license Application is in the discretion of the Chairperson.
   (b)   Fit to Hold a License – Licensee. If at any time the Chairperson is
notified that a Driver no longer meets the requirements for licensure, the
Chairperson can deny Driver's renewal application or may seek to suspend or
revoke his or her License.
   (c)   Denial of an Application. The Chairperson can reject or deny a new
Application for a License for the reasons specified in this section. If, at the
time of submission of an Application by the Applicant, the Chairperson
identifies that the Applicant meets the criteria in this section, the
Chairperson will reject the Application and no Application fees will be
accepted. If the Application is accepted by the Chairperson, no Application
fees will be refunded.
      (1)   Three-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous three years, the Applicant has committed:
         (i)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of driving a TLC licensed
vehicle while impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content), or Drugs.
         (ii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of bribery, fraud,
material misrepresentation, theft, threat against a person, harassment, abuse,
or use of physical force.
         (iii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, involving the
possession of a Weapon in a vehicle licensed under these Rules.
         (iv)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, resulting in the
revocation of a prior License, unless the prior License was revoked pursuant to
the mandatory penalties set forth in 35 RCNY §
80-02(e).
            1.   The three-year ban will apply if, while license revocation
charges were pending, a prior License expired or was surrendered to the
Chairperson.
            2.   Special Consideration for Persistent Violator Program
Revocations. After a minimum of one year from the date the Persistent Violator
summons is issued, an Applicant may request a waiver of the three-year ban from
the Chairperson. This request can only be made if the Applicant's driving
record reflects no more than three points for violations that occurred during
the three year period preceding the date of the request for the waiver.
      (2)   One-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous one year, the Applicant has committed:
         (i)   More than three traffic Collisions within a single year. The
one-year ban will be counted from the date of the last Collision.
         (ii)   Prior Application Denied. The Chairperson will deny an
Application that is submitted within one year after the submission of a prior
Application, if the previous Application was denied because the Applicant was
found not Fit to Hold a License. The one-year ban will be counted from the date
the prior application was submitted to the Commission.
         (iii)   Illegal use of Drugs, as determined by the Commission
following a drug test required by the Commission. This includes where the drug
test result was unchallenged or unsuccessfully challenged. The one-year ban
will run from the date of the failed drug test.
      (3)   Other Reasons for Denial of an Application.
         (i)   Mistake or Omission in the Application. The Chairperson can deny
an Application if the Application includes any material mistake or omission, or
if the Applicant fails to inform the Chairperson of any material change in the
Application.
         (ii)   Eligible for Persistent Violator Penalty. The Chairperson can
deny an Application if the Applicant would if licensed be subject to License
suspension or revocation under the Persistent Violator Program at the time the
Application is submitted.
            (1)   For purposes of this subparagraph, TLC will consider DMV
points accrued no earlier than 15 months prior to the date of the application
in order to determine whether the new applicant meets the Persistent Violator
Program standard.
         (iii)   Pendency of Criminal Charges. The Chairperson will defer
consideration of an Application if the Applicant has criminal charges pending.
If the charges are not resolved within 90 days after the submission of the
Application, the Application will be denied.
      (4)   Settlements. When settling charges which may result in the
revocation of a License, the Chairperson and the Respondent in that proceeding
may agree to a ban on applying for a new License different than that provided
for in these rules, provided that the agreement is in writing.
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an Application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an Application within
180 days after the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an Application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
Application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the Application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 57-09 Licensing – Transfer of License.
   (a)   A Commuter Van Driver's License is not assignable or transferable.
§ 57-10 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
   (a)   Loss or Theft of License. A Driver, within 72 hours (not counting
holidays and weekends), must notify the Commission of the loss or theft of his
Commuter Van Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-10(a)
 
   (b)   Unreadable License. A Driver must immediately surrender any unreadable
or unrecognizable Commuter Van Driver's License to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-10(b)
 
   (c)   No Alteration. A Driver must not alter in any way any portion of his
Commuter Van Driver's License or the attached photograph.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-10(c)
 
   (d)   Keep Likeness Updated. Whenever a Driver's physical appearance has
changed to any significant extent, the Driver must contact the Commission and
arrange to have a new photograph of him- or herself taken at the Commission
offices.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-10(d)
 
   (e)   Surrender of License. A Driver must surrender his or her License to
the Commission immediately upon revocation of the License. The License must be
surrendered within thirty days of the date of revocation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 to be paid if Driver applies for a new Appearance N/A
57-10(e)    License of any type.
 
§ 57-11 Comply with Laws – Unlicensed Activity Prohibited.
   (a)   Driver Must Be Licensed. A person must not operate a for-hire Commuter
Van without having a Valid Commuter Van Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(a)
 
   (b)   Driver Must Have a Valid Chauffeur's License. A driver must not
operate a Commuter Van unless he or she possesses a Valid Chauffeur's License.
The License of a Driver who operates a Commuter Van without a Valid Chauffer's
License will be summarily suspended. A Driver must not operate a Commuter Van
if the Driver’s driving privileges in New York State have been suspended or
revoked.
 
            First Violation: $350 and Suspension until
35 RCNY §  compliance.
57-11(b)    Second Violation in 24 months: $500 and    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Suspension until compliance.
            Third Violation in 36 months: revocation.
 
   (c)   Driver Must Be in Compliance with Article 19-A. A Commuter Van Driver
must be in compliance with Article 19-A of the New York State Vehicle and
Traffic Law. Driving a Commuter Van in noncompliance with Article 19-A is
considered to be the same as if the individual were driving a Commuter Van
without a Valid Commuter Van License. The License of a Driver who operates a
Commuter Van in noncompliance with Article 19-A will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and Suspension until compliance. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(c)
 
   (d)   Suspension or Revocation of Chauffer’s License. A Driver must
immediately report the suspension or revocation of his or her New York State
Chauffeur’s License or the revocation of the driver’s New York State Driving
privileges to the Commission, and must then surrender their Commuter Van
Driver’s License to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(d)
 
   (e)   Commuter Van Must Be Licensed and Authorized. A Commuter Van Driver
must not operate a Commuter Van unless it is:
      (1)   Licensed by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Operating under an Authorized and Valid Commuter Van Service.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 first violation; $2,000   Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(e)(2) subsequent violations within 24 months
 
   (f)   Shall Not Advertise Vehicle as Commuter Van Service. No person will
operate any vehicle bearing the words "Commuter Van Service," "van service,"
"Commuter Van," "van" or other similar designation unless all of the following
are true:
      (1)   The person has:
         A.   A Commuter Van Drivers License.
         B.   A Valid state driver's license.
      (2)   The vehicle is:
         A.   Licensed as a Commuter Van.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $500 first violation; $1,000
57-11(f)(1) & (2)(A) subsequent violations within 24    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                     months
 
         B.   Operating under an Authorized and Valid Commuter Van Service.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $1,000 first violation; $2,000   Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-11(f)(2)(B) subsequent violations within 24 months
 
   (g)   Driving with an Expired License. A person who drives an authorized,
Licensed Commuter Van after his or her Commuter Van Driver's License expires,
or before the Commission issues a renewal License is guilty of driving without
a License, and will be subject to the penalties for violation of 35 RCNY §
57-11(a).
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 57-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   No Bribery.
      (1)   Must Not Offer Bribe. A Driver or any person acting as his
representative must not offer or give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to
any member, employee, or representative of the Commission or any public servant
who is charged with the administration or enforcement of this chapter or any
traffic rule or law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Report Request for Bribe. A Commuter Van Driver must immediately
report to the Commission and to the New York City Department of Investigation
any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee,
representative or member of the Commission or any public servant who is charged
with the administration or enforcement of this chapter or any traffic rule or
law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(a)(2) revocation.
 
   (b)   No Fraud, Misrepresentation. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Driver, a Driver must not commit or attempt to commit,
any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(b)    days or revocation.
 
   (c)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Driver or any act in connection with those duties, a
Driver must not use or attempt to use any physical force against any person nor
harm or distract any Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(c)    days or revocation.
 
   (d)   Report Criminal Conviction. A Driver must notify the Commission within
five calendar days after any criminal conviction of the Driver. The notice must
be in writing and must be accompanied by a certified copy of the certificate of
disposition issued by the clerk of the court explaining what happened as a
result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
57-12(d)    hearing; $250 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (e)   Cooperate with Law Enforcement and the Commission. Commuter Van
Drivers must:
      (1)   Answer all questions truthfully and comply as directed with all
communications, directives and summonses from the Commission or any other
person or entity authorized to enforce the provisions of Chapter 5 of Title 19
of the Administrative Code relating to Commuter Vans;
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Produce any documents required by this section to be kept in the
Commuter Van upon the demand of any authorized person or entity; and
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
57-12(e)(2) hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (3)   Produce any document required by this chapter to be kept by no
later than 10 days following a request from the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(e)(3)
 
      (4)   (i) A Driver must report any change of Mailing Address and E-mail
Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-12(e)(4)(i)
 
         (ii)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to
the last Mailing Address provided by the Driver.
   (f)   No Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(f)    days or revocation.
 
   (g)   No Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(g)    days or revocation.
 
   (h)   Courtesy. A Licensee will be courteous to Passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
57-12(h)    hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
         (i)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person, and must not distract or attempt to distract any Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(i)    days or revocation.
 
   (j)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-12(j)
 
   (k)   Sexual Harassment. While performing the duties and responsibilities of
a Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in the sexual harassment of any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and mandatory suspension of 30
57-12(k)    days and/or revocation.                     Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
   (l)   Sexual Contact. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in sexual contact with any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,000 and mandatory revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
57-12(l)
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 57-13 Comply with Laws – Traffic Laws & Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Persistent Violator Program. In addition to any other action the
Commission might take, the following penalties will be enforced as part of the
Commission's Persistent Violator Program:
      (1)   License Suspension. If, within a 15-month period, a Driver
accumulates a total of at least six but fewer than ten TLC Points or DMV Points
or both combined, the Commission will suspend the Driver's Commuter Van
Driver's License for up to 30 days.
      (2)   License Revocation. If, within a 15-month period, a Driver
accumulates a total of 10 or more TLC Points or DMV Points or both combined,
the Commission will revoke the Driver's Commuter Van Driver's License.
      (3)   Review of Driver Fitness. The Commission can at any time review the
fitness of a Driver to continue to be licensed following any moving violation,
Collision, or other driving-related incident and can seek to impose other,
additional, and/or more severe penalties or take any other action permitted
under these Rules.
      (4)   15-Month Period. When determining whether a suspension or
revocation is required based on the accumulation of points in a 15-month
period, the Commission will count backwards 15 months from the date of the most
recent violation carrying points that is cited in the summons issued under this
section.
      (5)   Date of Point Accumulation. For the purpose of this rule, points
assigned by the Department of Motor Vehicles or TLC for any violation will be
counted as of the date of conviction.
      (6)   Multiple Points from a Single Incident. For a Driver who has been
found guilty of multiple violations arising from a single incident, the
Commission will consider the Driver guilty of the single violation with the
highest point total for purposes of this section.
      (7)   Point Reduction for Voluntary Course Completion. 
         (i)   Before suspending or revoking a Driver's License, the Commission
will deduct three TLC Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who
voluntarily attends and satisfactorily completes a Point Reduction Course or
three DMV Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who voluntarily
attends and satisfactorily completes a Defensive Driving Course. Such point
reduction will count only towards points accumulated by the Licensee as a
result of the conviction for violations that occurred within 15 months prior to
the date of the completion of the course, counting from the date of conviction.
In order for the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction Course to reduce
the Licensee's Persistent Violator Program points, the course must be
satisfactorily completed prior to the adjudication of the Persistent Violator
summons. Completion of the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction Course
after the adjudication of a Persistent Violator Program summons will reduce the
Licensee's Persistent Violator Program points only after the Licensee completes
his or her suspension. If the Licensee's driver's license was issued by a state
other than New York, the Licensee must submit a recent driving abstract from
the state of licensure.
         (ii)   The Driver must furnish the Commission with proof when the
course was taken and that the course was satisfactorily completed before the
Commission will reduce the Driver's point total.
         (iii)   If the Commission has already suspended or revoked the
Driver's License, the point reduction will not change the Commission's
decision.
         (iv)   The Commission will not reduce the TLC Points of any Driver
more than once in any five-year period and will not reduce the DMV Points of
any Driver more than once in any 18-month period.
         (v)   If no Point Reduction Course is available when the Driver seeks
to enroll, the Driver may take a Defensive Driving Course. After the Driver
furnishes the Commission with proof that the course was satisfactorily
completed, the TLC will deduct three points from the number of points accrued
under the Persistent Violator Program whether such points are TLC Points or DMV
Points.
   (b)   Compliance with Traffic Laws. A Commuter Van Driver must comply with
all applicable traffic laws, rules and regulations. The Commission will impose
fines and penalties in addition to any fines and penalties imposed by the
underlying law as follows:
      (1)   Laws, rules or regulations governing stationary vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
57-13(b)(1) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles, other than
hazardous moving violations defined by paragraph (3) of this subdivision.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
57-13(b)(2) hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (3)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles that involve
hazardous moving violations, defined as follows:
         •   speeding;
         •   failing to stop for school bus;
         •   following too closely (tailgating);
         •   inadequate brakes, either your own vehicle or your employer's
vehicle;
         •   failing to yield right-of-way; traffic signal violation; stop sign
violation;
         •   yield sign violation; railroad crossing violation; improper
passing;
         •   unsafe lane change; driving left of center; driving in wrong
direction; and
         •   leaving scene of a Collision involving property damage or injury
to animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
57-13(b)(3) hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing, for each violation below.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 57-14 Operations – Passenger and Driver Safety.
   (a)   Reckless Driving Rule. A Driver must not operate a Commuter Van in a
manner or at a speed that unreasonably endangers users of other vehicles,
pedestrians, or the Passengers.
 
            Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30
35 RCNY §  days, or revocation if Driver is found guilty  Appearance REQUIRED
57-14(a)    of having violated this rule more than three
            times within an 18-month period
 
   (b)   Use of Electronic Communication Device.
      (1)   A Driver must not Use an Electronic Communication Device while
operating a Vehicle. A Driver can Use an Electronic Communication Device only
while the Vehicle is lawfully standing or parked.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
57-14(b)(1) hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing, and suspension.
 
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided above for any violation of
this Rule, a Driver convicted of a violation of this Rule must complete a
Distracted Driving Course no later than 60 days after the date of conviction.
The license of a Driver who does not complete the Distracted Driving Course
within the 60 day period will be suspended until compliance. Penalty:
Suspension until compliance if course not completed within 60 days of the date
of conviction. The Driver must provide proof that the course was completed.
      (3)   Affirmative Defense. A Driver can offer an affirmative defense to a
charge of Using an Electronic Communication Device under this Rule if all of
the following are true:
         (i)   The communication was to an emergency response operator;
         (ii)   The communication reports an imminent threat to life or
property;
         (iii)   The Driver could not safely stop the Vehicle to make the
report; and
         (iv)   The Driver provides documentary proof of communication with an
emergency response provider.
   (c)   (1)   Report Before Leaving Scene. A Driver who knows or should have
known that a Collision involving the Driver's Commuter Van resulted in personal
injury to another or damage to another's property, must stop before leaving the
scene of the Collision, and if the other involved party is present, must:
         (i)   Show his or her Chauffeur's License, Commuter Van Driver's
License, and Vehicle License to the party sustaining the damage.
         (ii)   Give the other involved party his or her name, Chauffeur's
License number, the Vehicle owner's name, the affiliated Commuter Van Service
name and telephone number, Commuter Van Driver's License number, and Vehicle
License number, as well as the name of the Vehicle's insurance carrier and the
insurance policy number.
 
            Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days or
35 RCNY §  revocation if Driver is found guilty of having  Appearance REQUIRED
57-14(c)(1) violated this rule more than three times within
            a 12-month period.
 
      (2)   Notify Commuter Vans Service of Collision. If the Driver is
involved in a Collision, the Driver must immediately report the Collision to
the owner of the Commuter Van Service.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-14(c)(2)
 
   (d)   Serious Crashes. A serious crash is one in which any person has
suffered Critical Injury or death. "Critical Injury," for purposes of this
section, means any injury determined to be critical by the emergency medical
service personnel responding to such crash.
      (i)   If a Driver has been issued a summons for or charged with one or
more traffic related violations or crimes in a serious crash, the Driver's
License may be Summarily Suspended, upon a finding that the Driver's conduct
was a substantial cause of the Serious Crash. Upon conviction of the Driver of
one or more of the violations or crimes stated in the summons or charges and
upon a determination that one or more of the violations or crimes for which
conviction occurred was a cause of Critical Injury or death, the License will
be revoked. A Summary Suspension pursuant to this section may be lifted
pursuant to this Title or upon dismissal of all such charges or upon a finding
of not guilty of all of the stated traffic related violations and crimes,
except that the Chairperson may continue to suspend the license pursuant to an
investigation into the Driver's fitness, and such license may be revoked if the
Driver is found not Fit to Hold a License (see subdivision (ii)). This section
does not limit in any way the Chairperson's authority to Summarily Suspend a
Driver for other reasons.
      (ii)   After any Serious Crash of which the TLC is notified involving a
Driver operating a Licensed Vehicle, the TLC will review whether the Driver is
Fit to Hold a License under 35 RCNY §
57-08(b). The TLC can seek Suspension or Revocation of the Driver's License and
can Summarily Suspend the Driver's License while any fitness review or
enforcement action is pending, in accordance with 35 RCNY §
68-15.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 57-15 Operations – General Rules.
   (a)   [Reserved.] No Weapons.
   (b)   Driver Neat & Clean. A Driver must be clean and neat in dress and
person and present a professional appearance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-15(b)
 
   (c)   No smoking. A Driver must not smoke in a Commuter Van.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-15(c)
 
   (d)   [Reserved.] No locking rear doors.
   (e)   [Reserved.]
   (f)   [Reserved.] Have E-ZPass.
   (g)   No Overcharging Customers.
      (1)   A Commuter Van Driver will not charge or attempt to charge a
customer more than the fare that was approved in advance by the dispatcher.
      (2)   A Commuter Van Driver will not charge or attempt to charge any
additional fees for transporting a Person with a Disability, for a Service
Animal accompanying a Person with a Disability, or for wheelchairs or other
mobility aids.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $250 and order restitution for any Appearance REQUIRED
57-15(g)    overcharge passenger
 
      (3)   No Driver is permitted to ask or require a Passenger to tip.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-15(g)(3)
 
   (h)   [Reserved.] Non-paying Customers.
   (i)   [Reserved.] No Overloading Vehicle.
   (j)   [Reserved.] Use of Front Seat.
   (k)   [Reserved.] Luggage.
   (l)   [Reserved.] No Property.
   (m)   [Reserved.] No "Marketing" to Passengers.
   (n)   [Reserved.] Handling Passengers with Infectious Diseases.
   (o)   A Commuter Van Driver must not engage in horn-honking that violates
traffic rules and regulations.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-15(o)
 
§ 57-16 Operations – Comply with Reasonable Passenger Requests.
   (a)   [Reserved.]. Shortest Route Absent Reasonable Passenger Request.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Request to Change Destination or Terminate.
   (c)   [Reserved.] Request for Driver's Name, License Number.
   (d)   [Reserved.] Request for Receipt.
   (e)   Passenger Requests on Audio.
      (1)   All audio equipment controlled by the Driver must be turned on or
off at the request of the Passengers.
      (2)   The Passengers have the right to select what is played on the audio
equipment.
      (3)   The audio equipment must not be played if any Passenger objects.
      (4)   Whether or not the Vehicle is in use, an audio device must be
played at normal volume only, and must comply with all noise laws and
regulations.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-16(e)
 
   (f)   Passenger Requests on Air Conditioning. A Driver must turn on or off
heating or air-conditioning equipment at the request of the Passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-16(f)
 
§ 57-17 Operations – Method of Payment.
[Reserved.]
§ 57-18 Operations – Lost Property.
[Reserved.]
§ 57-19 Operations – Passenger Solicitation and Engagement.
   (a)   Solicitation of Passengers. A Commuter Van Driver must only transport
passengers on a pre-arranged basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-19(a)
 
   (b)   Limitations on Passenger Pick-up. A Commuter Van Driver must not
perform or allow the pick up or discharge passengers:
      (1)   Outside of the geographic area specified in the Commuter Van
Service Authorization, or
      (2)   Along any route of a City of New York or private bus line.
Exception: This restriction does not apply to the pick up or discharge of
passengers along bus routes in the borough of Manhattan south of Chambers
Street by drivers for commuter van services which on July 1, 1992 had authority
from the New York State Department of Transportation to pick up or discharge
passengers along bus routes in such area, provided that the scope of operations
by such commuter van services along bus routes in such area shall not exceed
the scope of such operations prior to July 1, 1992.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 first and second violation; Revocation for third        Appearance
57-19(b)    violation within six months (see Mandatory Penalties, 35 RCNY §  NOT
            57-02(d))                                                         REQUIRED
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 57-20 Operations – Refusing Passengers.
   (a)   Must Not Refuse. Unless justified, a Driver who is dispatched must not
refuse by words, gestures or any other means, to transport a person who has
prearranged the trip and the destination is within Commuter Van Service's
Authorized jurisdiction. This includes a passenger accompanied by a Service
Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 for first violation; $350 -
57-20(a)    $500 for each subsequent violation within 36  Appearance REQUIRED
            months
 
   (b)   Justification for Refusal. Justifiable grounds for refusing to
transport passengers include:
      (1)   The passenger has a weapon
      (2)   The passenger has a package or some article that the Driver
reasonably believes could injure others or damage the Commuter Van Vehicle.
      (3)   The passenger is accompanied by an animal which is not properly or
adequately secured in a kennel case or other suitable container. (This
provision does not apply to Service Animals accompanying Persons with
Disabilities.)
      (4)   The passenger is intoxicated or disorderly. (A Driver must not,
however, refuse to provide service solely because of behavior caused by a
person's disability).
      (5)   The passenger has refused a request by the Commuter Van Driver to
stop smoking.
         (i)   The Driver may discharge a passenger who refuses to stop smoking
after the Driver made the request.
         (ii)   If a Driver discharges the passenger, it must be at a safe
location.
   (c)   Attendants for Passengers with Disabilities. 
      (1)   A Commuter Van Driver must not require a Person with a Disability
to be accompanied by an attendant.
      (2)   If a Person with a Disability is accompanied by an attendant, a
Driver must not charge or attempt to charge an additional fare for transporting
the attendant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $250 and order restitution for any Appearance REQUIRED
57-20(c)    overcharge to the passenger
 
   (d)   Luggage and Mobility Aids. A Commuter Van Driver must not refuse to
transport a passenger's wheelchair, crutches or other mobility aid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
57-20(d)
 
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 57-21 Operations – Cooperation with Issuing Jurisdictions.
[Reserved.]
§ 57-22 Vehicles – Operation and Condition.
   (a)   [Reserved.] 3-Minute Idle.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Inspect Condition.
   (c)   [Reserved.] No On-street Maintenance Other than Emergency.
   (d)   Clean Interior. A Driver during his or her work shift must keep the
Vehicle's interior clean and scent free.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-22(d)
 
   (e)   [Reserved.] Exterior Clean and Identification Visible.
   (f)   [Reserved.] No Unauthorized Equipment.
   (g)   [Reserved.] No Unauthorized Signing.
§ 57-23 Vehicles – Items Required to be in the Vehicle During Operation.
   (a)   Items in Vehicle. A Commuter Van Driver must not operate a Commuter
Van unless the following are present in the vehicle:
      (1)   The Commuter Van License;
      (2)   The Driver's Commuter Van Driver's License (this must be mounted in
a protective holder behind the Driver's seat);
      (3)   The Authorization to operate a Commuter Van Service, or a legible
photocopy; and
      (4)   The vehicle registration and evidence of current liability
insurance.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $25 per missing item; maximum Appearance NOT REQUIRED
57-23(a)(1)-(4) penalty $50
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 57-24 Vehicles – Written Trip Records. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 57-25 Vehicle Equipment – Electronic Trip Record System.
[Reserved.]
Chapter 58: Medallion Taxicab Service
§ 58-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining a Taxicab
License.
   (b)   To establish the rules and regulations for operating a Taxicab.
   (c)   To establish the penalties for violating the Rules.
§ 58-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 of the Rules of the City of New York, in which case the payment of
the fines will be deferred until 30 days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 58-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Reserved. 
   (b)   Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. The Accessible Taxi Dispatcher is the
entity which, under contract with the Commission, will convey dispatches, or
requests for accessible service to Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs and to
Drivers of Accessible Street Hail Liveries to provide transportation for a
Passenger or group of Passengers, at least one of whom must be mobility-
impaired, for trips that originate in New York City.
   (c)   Administrator for the purposes of this Chapter, will refer to an
executor, administrator, conservator, guardian or any other person or entity
legally appointed to act on behalf of an Owner of a Taxicab Medallion due to
owner's death or incompetency.
   (d)   Applicant in this chapter means the individual or Business Entity
applying for an original or renewal Taxicab License under this Chapter in whose
name the License applied for will be issued.
   (e)   Business Entity in this Chapter includes corporations, partnerships
and limited liability companies.
   (f)   Claim Letter is a letter asserting a possible Excess Claim against an
Owner of a Taxicab Medallion or a Taxicab Medallion.
   (g)   Dispatch. When used in this Chapter, the term Dispatch refers to an
Owner sending out one or more Taxicabs for a particular shift; it does NOT mean
sending a Taxicab to pick up a particular passenger by pre-arrangement.
   (h)   Dispatch Fee is the fee payable to the Driver of an Accessible
Taxicab, according to the Dispatch Fee schedule, for completing or attempting
to complete a trip dispatched by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. The Dispatch
Fee schedule, including cancellation fees and passenger no-show fees, will be
determined by the Commission, and posted on the Commission's website, every six
months based on a review of available funds and the Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher's service rates.
   (i)   Driver in this Chapter means a Taxicab Driver.
   (j)   Escrow Amount is the amount for which an escrow account is required to
be established in order to satisfy one or more Excess Claims.
   (k)   Excess Claim is a Tort Claim asserted against the Owner of a Taxicab
Medallion for more than the amount of insurance covering the Taxicab at the
time the claim arose.
   (l)   Fair Market Value in reference to the transfer of a Taxicab Medallion
is the average value of arms-length transactions for similar Medallions during
the prior calendar month, as determined by the Commission.
   (m)   Flat Rate is a definite dollar amount that will be charged to a
Taxicab passenger for a specific trip, and is fixed before the trip begins
(NOTE: "double the Taximeter" is not a Flat Rate).
   (n)   Fleet is a Business Entity organized for the purpose of owning or
operating Taxicabs that meets the following requirements:
      (1)   Controls a minimum of 25 Taxicabs
      (2)   has a single business location that is adequate for the storage,
maintenance, repair and dispatch of the Fleet Taxicabs and the storage and
maintenance of records
      (3)   operates with a dispatcher on the premises at least 18 hours every
day, who assigns Drivers to Fleet Taxicabs.
   (o)   Legatee means someone to whom the proceeds of an estate are to be
distributed.
   (p)   License in this Chapter means a Taxicab License.
   (q)   Licensee in this Chapter means the holder of a Taxicab License.
   (r)   Long Term Driver Affidavit is the document an Owner files with the
Commission indicating that a Taxicab will be operated by a Long Term Driver or
by Unspecified Drivers.
   (s)   Market Value in reference to the transfer of a Taxicab Medallion will
be the greater of: (i) the actual consideration being paid for the transfer;
and (ii) the Fair Market Value.
   (t)   Maximum Escrow Amount means:
      (1)   The Market Value of the Taxicab Medallion being transferred less
the value of any debt or liens secured by the Medallion and the Transfer costs
PLUS
      (2)   The value of any proceeds of any refinancing received by the Owner
that was not used to reduce any previously existing debt or liens secured by
the Medallion following the date of an occurrence of an alleged tort involving
the Taxicab which gives rise to a potential Excess Claim
   (u)   Medallion is the numbered plate originally issued by the Commission
and affixed to the outside of a Taxicab as physical evidence that the Taxicab
has been licensed to operate as a Medallion Taxicab.
   (v)   MTA Tax is the 50 cent tax on taxicab trips imposed by Article 29-A of
the NYS Tax Law.
   (w)   Owner in this Chapter means an individual or Business Entity licensed
by the Commission to own and operate one or more Medallion Taxicabs.
   (x)   Prior Claim Letter is a Claim Letter received by the Commission prior
to February 1, 2009.
   (y)   Secured Lender Escrow Amount means the Market Value of the Taxicab
Medallion being transferred less the value of any debt or liens secured by
Medallion and the Transfer Costs.
   (z)   Secured Lender Recipient means a secured creditor seeking to repossess
or foreclose upon a Taxicab Medallion in order to realize the value of its
secured interest, but that is not applying to operate the Taxicab Medallion and
will not be considered a Transferee provided the Secured Lender Recipient
places the Medallion in storage as required in 35 RCNY §
58-46(c).
   (aa)   Stop-Use Directive is a notice sent to an Owner by the Commission
directing the Owner to stop using a designated Agent because that Agent's
License has been revoked or suspended.
   (bb)   Substantial Interest in Taxicab Medallions means direct or indirect
ownership of four or more Medallions, that can result from one or more of the
following:
      (1)   Ownership of 25 percent or more of the stock in one or more
corporations that own Medallions
      (2)   Ownership of 25 percent or more of the membership interests in one
or more LLC's that own Medallions
      (3)   A partnership interest in one or more partnerships that own
Medallions
      (4)   Being an officer in one or more corporations that, in the
aggregate, have a direct or indirect equity interest in four or more
Medallions.
   (cc)   Taxicab License is the authority granted by the Commission for an
Applicant to own and operate a designated vehicle as a Taxicab within the
Commission's jurisdiction, and is evidenced by the Medallion affixed to the
hood of the vehicle.
   (dd)   Taxpayer is a person or Business Entity required to pay the MTA Tax.
   (ee)   10% Business Entity Person is a Business Entity Person who owns at
least 10% of a Business Entity.
   (ff)   Tort Letter is a statement from the insurer of a Taxicab stating
whether or not the insurer is aware of any Excess Claims against the Taxicab
Medallion or its Owner.
   (gg)   Transfer means the transfer of all or any portion of a Medallion
ownership interest, including the transfer of interests in a Business Entity
owning Medallions.
   (hh)   A Transferee is an Applicant seeking approval from or approved by the
Chairperson to own and operate a Medallion Taxicab in which Applicant is
acquiring an interest, either directly or indirectly, through a transfer
described under 35 RCNY §
58-43.
   (ii)   Transfer Costs means the administrative costs involved in processing
a transfer of ownership of a Taxicab Medallion and includes the costs of any
foreclosure or similar action and any outstanding fines or fees owed to the
Commission or the Parking Violations Bureau.
   (jj)   Transferor is the Owner of an interest in a Taxicab Medallion being
transferred.
   (kk)   Valid Claim Letter is a Claim Letter which is not a Prior Claim
Letter, and which:
      (1)   Is dated no more than one year prior to the date documentation is
submitted to the Chairperson for a proposed transfer of a Taxicab Medallion,
      (2)   Sets forth a minimum claim in an amount sufficient to be an "Excess
Claim",
      (3)   Includes a copy of the police report regarding the incident in
question, and
      (4)   Includes a representation by the sender that the party against
which the Excess Claim has been asserted has been provided with a copy of the
Claim Letter.
   (ll)   Unspecified Driver is a term that is entered on a Rate Card
indicating that the Taxicab can be driven by any Licensed Taxicab Driver whose
name (or category) has been filed with the Commission by the Owner of that
Taxicab.
   (mm)   Wheelchair Passenger. A Wheelchair Passenger is a Passenger using a
wheel- chair.
(Amended City Record 10/23/2015, eff. 11/22/2015; amended City Record 3/4/2016,
eff. 4/3/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City
Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/
2019; amended City Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024)
§ 58-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Identification. An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a
Business Entity applying for a Taxicab License must provide to the Commission:
      (1)   A Valid Government-issued photo ID and
      (2)   A Valid Social Security Number.
   (b)   Age. An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
applying for a Taxicab License or its renewal must be at least 18 years of age.
   (c)   Good Moral Character.
      (1)   An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
applying for a Taxicab License must be fingerprinted and must be of good moral
character. Fingerprinting for the purpose of investigating good moral character
is also required of the following, unless waived by the Chairperson in his or
her discretion:
         (i)   Any new Business Entity Persons added by a Licensee
         (ii)   Any individual or Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
that provides funds for any Owner, unless the provider is a licensed bank or
loan company
      (2)   Applicant's criminal history will be considered in a manner
consistent with the Corrections Law of the State of New York.
   (d)   Fit to Hold a License. An individual or Business Entity must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the Applicant is Fit to
Hold the License of an Owner of a Taxicab License.
   (e)   Drivers Designated as Agents to Accept Service.
      (1)   An Owner must designate each and every Driver who operates one of
Owner's Taxicabs as an agent to accept service of Commission notices to correct
defects in the Taxicab.
      (2)   Delivery of a notice of defect to a Driver will be adequate service
of notice to the Owner.
   (f)   Financial Disclosure.
      (1)   An Applicant for a Taxicab License where the Applicant already owns
one or more Medallion Taxicabs must provide a financial disclosure statement to
the Commission.
      (2)   The disclosure statement must be completed on a form provided by
the Commission and must include the disclosure of assets, liabilities, income
and net worth of all Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity Applicant, as
well as any other information required by the Commission.
      (3)   The financial disclosure statement must be given under oath and
must include all attachments and documentation required by the Commission.
   (g)   Liability Insurance. The Applicant must have liability insurance
coverage by bond or policy as required by the State of New York and these
Rules.
   (h)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (i)   Current Address and E-mail Address. An Applicant must give the
Commission the Applicant's current Mailing Address and E-mail Address.
   (j)   An Applicant who, as an individual or as a Business Entity failed to
make payments in accordance with a Loan Restructure 35 RCNY §
58-51, Medallion Relief Program, may not acquire an interest in a taxicab
license for a period of five years from the date of default.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2016,
eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/29/2022, eff. 9/29/2022)
§ 58-05 Licensing – Special Requirements.
   (a)   Commission Approval. All Medallion transfers, including partial
transfers, must be approved by the Commission. All Applicants to own a
Medallion or an interest in a Medallion must be approved by the Commission.
   (b)   Concurrent Purchase and Licensing of Medallion. An application to own
and operate a Medallion Taxicab must be filed by any individual or Business
Entity acquiring a Medallion, including an interest in a Medallion, either:
      (1)   As part of the public sale or auction process, if the Applicant is
purchasing a Medallion from the Commission
      (2)   Jointly, with the current Owner (the "transferor") of the
Medallion, if the Applicant is purchasing a Medallion from a private Owner,
      (3)   As a transfer of an interest in an Owner,
      (4)   By becoming a new Business Entity Person in an Owner, or
      (5)   By succeeding to the interest of any Owner or Business Entity
Person of any Owner.
   (c)   Vehicle Ownership Requirements. An Applicant must demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Commission that the Applicant:
      (1)   Owns a vehicle that meets all of the requirements set forth in 35
RCNY
Chapter 67 (Taxicab Hack-Up) of these Rules, as well as the requirements of all
other governmental agencies having concurrent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Possesses the certificate of title and the certificate of
registration, both of which must be in the name of the Applicant unless title
is retained by a lessor or conditional vendor; and
      (3)   Has provided the Commission with all information required
concerning the financing of the purchase price of the Medallion and/or Taxicab.
   (d)   Licensing – Special Requirements for Business Entities. 
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations.
         (i)   If the Applicant is a corporation it must file the following
with its Taxicab License application:
            A.   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
            B.   A list of officers and shareholders
            C.   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected
         (ii)   No corporate or trade name will be accepted by the Commission
that is similar to a name already in use by another Owner.
         (iii)   All officers and shareholders of the corporate Taxicab License
Applicant must disclose each and every Medallion in which he or she has any
interest whatsoever, including but not limited to, any interest as individual
Owner or as a Business Entity Person in a Business Entity that owns other
Medallion(s); this disclosure must be made:
            A.   Upon original application for the Taxicab License,
            B.   Upon application for renewal of a Taxicab License, and
            C.   Upon application for transfer of a Taxicab License.
         (iv)   All corporate officers and shareholders are subject to the same
standards and criteria as individual Owners.
         (v)   The Commission will only recognize corporate officers that have
been approved by the Commission.
         (vi)   It is a violation of these Rules for a corporate Owner to
appoint a new officer without the approval of the Commission.
         (vii)   Temporary approval contingent on final approval can be
permitted in cases where an officer has resigned or died and another individual
must be able to continue the regular daily operation of the Owner corporation.
         (viii)   The standards and criteria for Ownership are equally
applicable when the shares of a corporate Owner are held by another Business
Entity.
      (3)   Closed Corporations.
         (i)   A stockholder in a closed corporation that owns a Medallion will
be personally accountable for complying with these Rules and any other laws
that relate directly and uniquely to Medallion Ownership.
         (ii)   If a closed corporation wants to transfer stock or Medallion(s)
to another closed corporation that is already an approved Medallion owner, the
stockholders of the transferee corporation must sign an assumption and
indemnification agreement in which they agree to assume all of the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these Rules and to indemnify the Commission for
all unpaid fines or fees regarding the Medallion(s) owned by the transferor
corporation.
      (4)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs).
         (i)   If the Applicant is a limited liability company it must file the
following with its Taxicab License application:
            A.   A copy of its articles of organization
            B.   A copy of its operating agreement
            C.   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
         (ii)   No LLC or trade name will be accepted by the Commission that is
similar to a name already in use by another Owner.
         (iii)   All members of the LLC Taxicab License Applicant must disclose
each and every Medallion in which he or she has any interest whatsoever,
including, but not limited to, any interest as an individual Owner or any
interest as a Business Entity Person in a Business Entity that owns other
Medallion(s); this disclosure must be made:
            A.   Upon the original application for the Taxicab License,
            B.   Upon application for renewal of a Taxicab License, and
            C.   Upon application for transfer of a Taxicab License.
         (iv)   All members of the Owner are subject to the same standards and
criteria as individual Owners.
         (v)   The Commission will only recognize members that have been
approved by the Commission.
         (vi)   It is a violation of these Rules for an Owner that is an LLC to
add a new member without the approval of the Commission.
         (vii)   The standards and criteria for Ownership are equally
applicable when membership interests in a LLC Owner are held by another
Business Entity.
(Amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016)
§ 58-06 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New License.
      (1)   Length of Term. The term of a new Taxicab License is a maximum of
two years.
      (2)   Expiration Date. The first term of Taxicab License expires on May
31st of the year set by the Commission.
   (b)   Renewal License.
      (1)   Length of Term. Each renewal term is two years and expires on May
31st of the second year of the term.
      (2)   Extension. The Chairperson can extend the effectiveness of a
Taxicab License until the completion of the next scheduled inspection of the
Taxicab, or as the Chairperson believes is appropriate.
   (c)   Filing for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application by no later
than May 31 of each year in which a License is scheduled to expire.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   A License for which a renewal application has not been filed by May
31 is not Valid and cannot be used until the renewal is approved. This is in
addition to any penalties specified for a violation of this Rule.
      (4)   It is the Owner's responsibility to obtain a renewal application in
order to comply with the filing deadline.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension up to 30 days Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-06(c)    for failure to file by April 30.
 
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License will be subject to the
penalties provided for in (c).
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
   (e)   Advertising Permits. A permit to display exterior advertising runs for
one year or less and each permit will expire on the 31st day of August.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-07 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Annual Fee. The fee for each Taxicab License is $550 annually; the fee
will be pro-rated if the License will be owned for less than one year by the
next May 31st.
   (b)   Medallion Tin Replacement Fee. 
      (1)   The fee for a new Medallion "tin" will be $10. This fee will be
charged when the Commission issues a new "tin", including when it issues a new
model of "tin".
      (2)   If a "tin" is lost, stolen or damaged, the replacement fee is $25.
   (c)   License Plate Replacement Fee. The Commission's fee for replacement of
license plates issued by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles will
be $25 per vehicle.
   (d)   Inspection Fee. The Commission's fee for a required Taxicab Safety and
Emissions inspection is $90; this fee includes the certificate of inspection
issued when the Taxicab passes the inspection. Inspection fees must be prepaid
with each application and renewal application.
   (e)   Reinspection Fee. There is a reinspection fee only if reinspection is
required because the Taxicab failed the component of the inspection required by
Section 301 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. In that case, the
reinspection fee is thirty five dollars ($35). If reinspection is required
because the Taxicab failed any other component of the inspection, there is no
reinspection fee.
   (f)   Stand-By Vehicle Fee. The fee for each Stand-By Vehicle is $550
annually. Inspection fees are also charged for Stand-By Vehicles.
   (g)   Advertising Permit Fee. The fee for a permit to display exterior
advertising is $50 annually. If a permit is surrendered in less than 6 months,
one half of the fee will be refunded.
   (h)   Vehicle Transfer Fees.
      (1)   An Owner can transfer a Medallion from one vehicle to another after
approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $50 fee.
      (2)   An Owner can replace the license plates on a Taxicab after approval
by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (3)   An Owner can transfer the license plates from one vehicle to
another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (4)   An Owner must pay a separate fee for each separate transfer. This
is true even if the Owner wants to do several types of vehicle transfer all at
one time.
   (i)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (j)   Taxi Accessibility Fee. An Owner must pay the Taxi Accessibility Fee
for each Medallion owned. The Taxi Accessibility Fee must be paid when charged
by the Commission.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-08 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Meet Requirements. The Commission can deny an application
for a License or its renewal of any Applicant who fails to meet the
requirements. The Commission will inform the Applicant, in writing, of the
specific reason(s) for this denial.
   (b)   Material Misrepresentation or Falsification. The Commission will deny
an application for a License or its renewal, or can impose other sanctions, if
any of the following occurs:
      (1)   The Applicant makes a material misrepresentation in the application
      (2)   The Applicant fails to inform the Commission of a material change
in the information contained in the application
      (3)   The Applicant attempts to conceal the identity of a party having an
interest in the ownership of a Taxicab.
   (c)   No Longer Meets Requirements. The Commission can deny an application
for a License or its renewal and can revoke or suspend any License if the
Commission becomes aware of information that the Owner no longer meets the
requirements for an Owner's License.
   (d)   Violation of the Rules. The Commission can deny an application for a
License if, within the past two years, the Applicant (or any Business Entity
Person of a Business Entity Applicant) has engaged in any of the following:
      (1)   Assault of a passenger, official or member of the public in any way
relating to a Taxicab
      (2)   Any instance of bribery or unlawful gratuity toward a city employee
      (3)   Providing the Commission with false information
      (4)   Two or more unlawful passenger service refusals
      (5)   Two or more incidents of overcharging, as a Driver
      (6)   Three failures to respond to an official communication
      (7)   Three or more vehicle safety violations for a particular Taxicab
      (8)   Whether as an individual has or as a Business Entity Person of a
Business Entity that has:
         (i)   Ten or more outstanding unexcused failures to appear at
scheduled TLC hearings, or
         (ii)   Ten or more unsatisfied Commission fines or fines that remained
unsatisfied until renewal.
   (e)   The Applicant's criminal history will be reviewed in a manner
consistent with the NYS Corrections Law.
   (f)   Chronic Disregard of Public Welfare. An Applicant will not be approved
to own another Medallion or to be a stockholder or an officer in another
corporate Medallion Owner if he or she has evidenced a chronic disregard for
the rules and regulations that impact the welfare, safety or security of the
riding public.
   (g)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 180
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (h)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
   (i)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax. 
      (1)   The Commission will deny an application, including a renewal
application, if the following Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amounts are not paid
for any Vehicle subject to the application:
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount required under
subdivision (k) of 35 RCNY §
58-04, including the interim payment, if any, or
         (ii)   Any additional Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount for any tax
year or period which the New York City Department of Finance has notified the
Commission is due and unpaid.
      (2)   Payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision is a condition to issuance of a License,
including a renewal License, and the maintaining of such License.
      (3)   An Applicant applying to renew a vehicle for which the Commercial
Motor Vehicle Tax has not been paid at the time that the renewal application is
submitted is deemed not to have submitted the application by the required
deadline and may be subject to penalties under subdivision (c) of 35 RCNY §
58-06.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 58-09 Licensing – Procedures for Approval/Denial.
[Reserved.]
§ 58-10 Licensing – Transfer of License.
(See 35 RCNY §§
58-43 –
58-48)
§ 58-11 Licensing – Care of Medallion License & Rate Card.
   (a)   Do Not Alter Rate Card. An Owner must not change, mark, cross out or
make any unauthorized entries on a Taxicab's Rate Card, or display a Rate Card
that contains wrong information.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-11(a)    $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Replace Damaged Medallion or Rate Card. An Owner must immediately
surrender an unreadable Rate Card or a damaged Medallion to the Commission for
replacement.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-11(b)
 
   (c)   Replace Damaged Medallion or Rate Card. An Owner must immediately
surrender an unreadable Rate Card or a damaged Medallion to the Commission for
replacement.
      (1)   An Owner must notify the Commission and the Police Department of
the theft, loss or destruction of any Medallion or Rate Card within 48 hours
(not including weekends and holidays) of the loss.
      (2)   The Owner must also provide any affidavit or information the
Commission requires, including the police receipt number.
      (3)   A substitute Medallion and Rate Card will be issued by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-11(c)(1)-(2)
 
   (d)   Report Finding Lost Medallion or Rate Card.
      (1)   An Owner must notify the Commission and the Police Department
within 24 hours (not including weekends and holidays) after locating any
Medallion or Rate Card that was reported as stolen or lost.
      (2)   The Owner must also provide any affidavit or information the
Commission requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 for the first violation; $350 -
58-11(d)    $500 for the second or subsequent violation Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            (s) within 36 months
 
   (e)   Surrender Medallion and Rate Card. An Owner must surrender Owner's
Medallion and Rate Card to the Commission:
      (1)   Within 48 hours of notice that Owner's Taxicab License has been
suspended or revoked.
      (2)   Prior to the sale of Owner's Taxicab.
      (3)   Prior to removal of Owner's Taxicab from service for a period of 30
or more consecutive days.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
58-11(e)    hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Report Replaced New York License Plates. An Owner must report to the
Commission the replacement of any lost or stolen New York State license plates
within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) after getting the new
plates.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-11(f)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 58-12 Compliance with Law – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   No Unlicensed Taxicabs. 
      (1)   An Owner must ensure that all of Owner's Taxicabs in operation for
hire are Validly licensed by the Commission and have a Valid Medallion attached
to the vehicle.
      (2)   The Commission will post on its website a list of Validly licensed
Taxicabs and Medallions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
58-12(a)
 
   (b)   No Advertising as "Taxi" if Unlicensed. An Owner who does not have a
Valid License must not hold himself or herself out to the public as a "taxi,"
"Taxicab" or "hack" service.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-12(b)    days
 
   (c)   No Unregistered Vehicles.
      (1)   An Owner must ensure that all of Owner's Taxicabs are operated only
while the registration of the vehicle remains Valid.
      (2)   Operating a vehicle without a Valid registration will be considered
the same as operating without a Valid TLC Driver License. The License of an
Owner who operates a vehicle without valid registration will be summarily
suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-12(c)    days; Suspension until compliance
 
   (d)   No Unlicensed Drivers.
      (1)   No Taxicab can be operated for hire unless the driver has in his or
her possession a Valid TLC Driver License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
58-12(d)(1)
 
      (2)   Exceptions. An Owner can permit a person who does not possess a TLC
Driver License to drive the vehicle only when all of the following limited
circumstances are met:
         (i)   The Roof Light is turned off;
         (ii)   The driver has logged off from the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
58-12(d)(2)
 
      (3)   The Commission will post on New York City's open data platform a
list of Drivers holding Valid TLC Driver Licenses.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-13 Compliance with Laws – Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   Maintain Insurance Coverage.
      (1)   Taxicab Owners must ensure that all of their Taxicabs are covered
by liability insurance in the form of a bond or an insurance policy that fully
complies with the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and the New York State
Insurance Law, and TLC Rules.
      (2)   Owners must maintain all other forms of insurance required by law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(a)    days
 
   (b)   Submit Proof of Insurance. Every year in which an Owner files an
application to renew the License of one or more Taxicabs, Owner must, at that
time, provide the Commission with the name and address of the Owner's insurance
carrier and the policy numbers for each of Owner's Taxicabs, along with proof
of coverage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(b)
 
   (c)   Notification of Changes in Insurance Coverage. An Owner must notify
the Commission in writing within 72 hours of any of the following:
      (1)   Receipt of notice that Owner's required liability insurance has
been cancelled;
      (2)   A change of insurance carrier;
      (3)   A change in the policy number of Owner's liability insurance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-13(c)
 
   (d)   Coverage Requirements. No Taxicab can be operated unless it is covered
by policies of insurance approved as to form by the Commission and issued by
companies authorized to do business in this State by the Superintendent of
Insurance.
      (1)   All Taxicab Owners must, for each of Owner's Taxicabs, maintain
liability coverage through an insurance policy or a bond in amounts not less
than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of § 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $100,000 minimum liability and not less than $300,000 maximum
liability for bodily injury or death, as these terms are described and defined
in § 370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law; and
         (iii)   $10,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-13(d)(1)
 
      (2)   A Taxicab Fleet or Minifleet as well as an Independent Owner
operating more than one shift daily must maintain double shift insurance
coverage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(d)(2) days
 
      (3)   Policy Coverage Restrictions. Insurance policies covering
Commission-licensed vehicles cannot have any limitations or restrictions on
location or timeframes of coverage. Coverage provided under issued policies
must be for 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, regardless of vehicle use or
purpose.
      (4)   Excess policies may be used to satisfy the Commission’s minimum
coverage requirements with a company authorized to do business in this State by
the Superintendent of Insurance.
      (5)   Policy Information Required. Documentation submitted to the
Commission for each vehicle covered by a policy must contain the vehicle
identification number for each such vehicle, effective and end dates of the
policy, coverage amounts, and Certificates of Liability.
         (i)   Declaration pages are required upon Commission request and must
contain the schedule of covered vehicles and the policy number.
         (ii)   All documentation must be submitted electronically in a form
approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §             Fine: $350 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(d)(3), (4) & (5) compliance
 
   (e)   Report of Collisions. 
      (1)   Report to Insurance Carrier. Any Collision involving one (or more)
of Owner's Taxicabs that is required to be reported to the insurance carrier
must be immediately reported to the carrier by the Owner, in writing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Report to Commission.
         (i)   An Owner must immediately report to the Commission in writing
all Collisions that are required to be reported to the Department of Motor
Vehicles (as required by § 605 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law) that involve any
of Owner's Taxicabs.
         (ii)   An Owner must also provide to the Commission a copy of any
legally required report filed with the NYS Department of Motor Vehicles, within
10 days of the date the report is due to be filed with the Department of Motor
Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 and $25 for each day of violation Appearance REQUIRED
58-13(e)(2) thereafter and suspension until compliance
 
   (f)   Surrender Rate Card and Medallion upon Termination of Insurance. An
Owner must either:
      (1)   Surrender the Taxicab's Rate Card and Medallion to the Commission
on or before the termination date of the vehicle's insurance, or
      (2)   Submit proof of new insurance effective on the date of termination
of the old policy.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-13(f)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City
Record 2/4/2025, eff. 1/1/2026; amended City Record 9/25/2025, eff. 3/1/2026)
§ 58-14 Compliance with Laws – Workers' Compensation.
   (a)   Compliance with Law. An Owner must comply with all provisions of the
New York State Workers' Compensation Law and regulations with respect to
coverage and benefits to eligible persons.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 for each day in violation Appearance REQUIRED
58-14(a)
 
   (b)   File Certificate of Coverage with the Commission. An Owner must
maintain on file with the Commission a current Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Coverage, or a Valid exemption.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-14(b)
 
   (c)   Designate the Commission to Receive Notices. An Owner must designate
the Commission as a certificate holder to receive all notices concerning the
Workers' Compensation policy.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-14(c)
 
   (d)   Provide Driver with Proof of Benefits Ending. When a Driver who is
receiving Workers Compensation benefits has recovered and is ready to return to
work, an Owner must:
      (1)   File a notice with the Workers' Compensation Board to end the
disbursement of benefits due to the worker's recovery; and
      (2)   Provide the Driver with documentation that benefits have ceased in
order for the Commission to return the Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-14(d)
 
§ 58-15 Compliance with Law – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery.
      (1)   Actual Bribery Attempt. An Owner must not bribe or attempt to bribe
or offer any gratuity whatsoever to any employee, representative or member of
the Commission in return for favorable or preferential treatment.
 
            Fine: Up to $10,000 per Medallion implicated in
35 RCNY §  the violation plus mandatory divestiture of any
58-15(a)(1) and all Taxicab Licenses held by the Owner, and Appearance REQUIRED
            any held by a director, officer or stockholder
            of the Owner.
 
      (2)   Appearance of Bribery. An Owner must not offer or give any gift or
gratuity or any other thing of value to any employee, representative or member
of the Commission, or any public servant or dispatcher employed at a public
transportation facility.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 plus revocation Appearance: N/A
58-15(a)(2)
 
      (3)   Failure to Report Bribery. An Owner must immediately report to the
Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation any request or demand for a
gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee, representative or member of
the Commission or any other public servant or dispatcher employed at a public
transportation facility.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(a)(3) revocation.
 
      (4)   Failure to Remove Cash. When the Taxicab is in Owner's possession,
Owner must remove all currency from a Taxicab's interior prior to its
inspection by any Commission personnel.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-15(a)(4)
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, an Owner must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert
with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(b)    days or revocation
 
   (c)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, an Owner must not deliberately fail to perform,
alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best interests
of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or Suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(c)    days or revocation.
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, an Owner must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or Suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(d)    days or revocation.
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, an Owner must not threaten, harass or abuse any
person or Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(e)    days or revocation
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, an Owner must not use any physical force
against any person or Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(f)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Reporting of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Licensee must immediately notify the Commission of any criminal
conviction of the Taxicab Owner, individually or, if the Licensee is a Business
Entity, of any Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(g)
 
   (h)   Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Licensee must cooperate with all law
enforcement officers, authorized representatives of the Commission and the NYC
Department of Investigation. Cooperation includes, but is not limited to,
responding to a request for Licensee's name, Licensee's Medallion numbers, Rate
Cards, Trip Records, and any other documents required to be maintained by the
Taxicab Owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(h)
 
   (i)   Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   An Owner must promptly answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives and the NYC Department of Investigation or its representatives.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-15(i)(1)
 
      (2)   An Owner must respond to any contact from the Commission within 48
hours, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-15(i)(2)
 
   (j)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. An Owner must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-15(j)
 
(Amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 58-16 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Compliance with Commission Rules and Regulations, Generally and
Specifically.
      (1)   An Owner must comply with the Commission's Taxicab specifications,
the Marking Specifications for Taxicabs, all pertinent provisions of the
Administrative Code and other laws, rules or regulations governing Taxicab
Owners.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
58-16(a)(1) hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   Commercial Advertising and Commercial Sponsorships on the Back of
Taximeter Receipts.
         (i)   Commercial advertising and commercial sponsorships may be
printed on the back of receipts produced by a taximeter.
         (ii)   Any such advertising and sponsorships appearing on a receipt
must comply with the commercial advertising and commercial sponsorship
standards that apply to Passenger-facing content as set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-24(g)(3).
         (iii)   Any such advertising and sponsorships appearing on a receipt
must not interfere with the readability of the fare information on the face of
the receipt.
 
                          Fine: $200 if plead guilty
35 RCNY §                before a hearing; $300 if  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-16(a)(2)(ii) and (iii) found guilty following a
                          hearing.
 
   (b)   Compliance with Accessible Taxicab Medallion Rules.
      (1)   An Owner of an Accessible Taxicab Medallion must comply with 35
RCNY
Chapter 53. An Owner of a Taxicab hacked up as an Accessible Taxicab (even if
the Medallion is not an Accessible Taxicab Medallion) must also comply with 35
RCNY
Chapter 53.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: 35 RCNY
58-16(b)(1) Chapter 53 penalties apply
 
      (2)   An Owner of an Accessible Taxicab (whether or not the Owner's
Medallion is an Accessible Taxicab Medallion) must ensure that Drivers of an
Owner's Accessible Taxicab comply with 35 RCNY
Chapter 53 and
         (i)   Maintain contact with the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher and
         (ii)   Accept dispatches from the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher to
provide trips to Passengers in Wheelchairs.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: 35 RCNY
58-16(b)(2) Chapter 53 penalties apply
 
   (c)   No False Statements. 
      (1)   An Owner must not file with the Commission any statement required
under the Special Requirements for Business Entities provision (35 RCNY §
58-05(e)) that the Owner knows or should know to be false, misleading,
deceptive or materially incomplete.
      (2)   An Owner must not file with the Commission any statement required
under the Financial Disclosure provision (35 RCNY §
58-04(f)) that the Owner knows or should know to be false, misleading,
deceptive or materially incomplete.
 
                    Fine: Up to $10,000 per Medallion
                    implicated in the violation and/or
35 RCNY §          mandatory divestiture of any and all   Appearance REQUIRED
58-16(c)(1) and (2) interests in any Taxicab Licenses held
                    by the Owner, shareholder, officer,
                    director or partner in violation
 
   (d)   No Unlawful Purpose.
      (1)   An Owner must not use or permit any other person to use Owner's
Taxicab, garage or office of record for any unlawful purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - 1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-16(d)(1) days or revocation
 
      (2)   An Owner must not conceal any evidence of a crime connected with
Owner's Taxicab, garage or office of record.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - 1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-16(d)(2) days or revocation
 
      (3)   An Owner must report immediately to the police any attempt to use
Owner's Taxicab to commit a crime or to escape from the scene of a crime.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-16(d)(3) days
 
   (e)   No False Credentials.
      (1)   An Owner must not attempt to avoid inspection of a Licensed vehicle
by using false credentials to disguise one vehicle as another or by any other
means contrary to law or regulation of the Commission.
 
            Fine: Up to $10,000 per Medallion implicated in
35 RCNY §  the violation plus mandatory divestiture of any
58-16(e)(1) and all Taxicab Licenses held by the Owner, and Appearance REQUIRED
            any held by a director, officer or stockholder
            of the Owner
 
      (2)   An Owner must not operate or present for inspection a vehicle in
which the Vehicle Identification Number has been loosened and reattached, or
switched from another vehicle or otherwise altered in a manner not in
compliance with Article 17 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
            Fine: Mandatory divestiture of any and all
35 RCNY §  Taxicab Licenses held by the Owner, and any
58-16(e)(2) held by a director, officer or stockholder of Appearance REQUIRED
            the Owner, plus a fine of up to $10,000 per
            Medallion implicated in the violation
 
      (3)   An Owner must not present documents to the Commission that falsely
indicate compliance with liability insurance and/or Workers' Compensation
insurance requirements.
 
            Fine: Mandatory divestiture of any and all
35 RCNY §  Taxicab Licenses held by the Owner, and any
58-16(e)(3) held by a director, officer or stockholder of Appearance REQUIRED
            the Owner, plus a fine of up to $10,000 per
            Medallion implicated in the violation
 
   (f)   Taxicab Improvement Fund (TSP and Medallion Owner Responsibility).
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider is
responsible for remitting all collected Taxicab Improvement Surcharge amounts
to the Taxicab Improvement Fund, as described in subdivision (a) of 35 RCNY §
66-25.
      (2)   When any Taxicab Improvement Surcharge amount due is not collected
by the Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider, the Owner
of the subject Medallion must pay the entire such amount, as remitted by the
Taxicab Driver, to the Taxicab Improvement Fund.
      (3)   The Owner of any Medallion, or the Technology System Provider and/
or E-Hail Application used by the Owner of a Medallion, must pay the Taxicab
Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Fund at the time and in the
manner required by the Commission.
      (4)   If an Owner, or the Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail
Application used by the Owner of a Medallion, does not pay the Taxicab
Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Fund at the time required,
nonpayment will be grounds for the suspension of the TLC license issued to the
entity required to pay and/or by the denial of any renewal application or of
any application for another TLC-issued license submitted by such entity, in
addition to monetary penalties for such non-payment.
 
35 RCNY §    Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-16(f)(1-4)
 
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/14/2018,
eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-17 Operations – Business Premises.
   (a)   Maintenance of Physical Location. The following entities must maintain
a business premise in a location zoned for the operation of a business:
      (1)   Any Agent;
      (2)   Any Owner who leases or otherwise Dispatches one or more Taxicabs
for return at the end of a shift;
      (3)   Any Owner or Business Entity that has a Substantial Interest in
Taxicab Medallions.
   (b)   Requirements of Premises. The Business Premises must have the
following:
      (1)   Sufficient off-street space at or near the premises to store the
lesser of:
         (i)   Twenty-five (25) vehicles, or
         (ii)   Fifty percent (50%) of the Taxicabs leased or otherwise
Dispatched on a daily or a shift basis, plus five percent (5%) of the Taxicabs
leased for longer than one day.
 
35 RCNY §  Suspension until condition is corrected Appearance REQUIRED
58-17(b)(1)
 
      (2)   Sufficient office space to conduct business, where all records
required by the Commission, including Trip Records and Driver records, can be
kept.
 
35 RCNY §  Suspension until condition is corrected Appearance REQUIRED
58-17(b)(2)
 
      (3)   "Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be posted in a form and format
prescribed by the Commission.
         (i)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site.
         (ii)   The "Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be:
            •   conspicuously posted, such as next to a payment window or other
place where drivers regularly conduct business within the Business Premises,
and,
            •   free of other signage in the immediate area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
58-17(b)(3) hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (c)   Hours of Operation. Owner must keep regular business hours, including
the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. for every weekday.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-17(c)
 
   (d)   Contact Information. Owner must maintain the current address and
telephone number of the business premises with the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-17(d)
 
§ 58-18 Operations – Management Oversight.
   (a)   Direct Owner Operations. The Commission will hold the Owner of every
Taxicab accountable for hands-on operation of the Taxicabs and expects the
Owner to be personally responsible for:
      (1)   Physically observing the Taxicabs
      (2)   Overseeing compliance with Taxicab inspection requirements
      (3)   Overseeing compliance with insurance and all other regulatory
requirements
      (4)   Communicating with Drivers (where the Owners vehicles are driven by
Drivers other than him/herself).
   (b)   Indirect Owner Operations.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions in 35 RCNY §
58-18(a) above, an Owner can authorize employees or a Licensed Agent to perform
any or all such functions.
      (2)   The use of an employee or Agent will not relieve an Owner of any
obligation under these rules.
      (3)   An Owner remains fully accountable for all violations of Commission
rules, committed by any employee or Agent in the operation of Owner's Medallion
(s).
   (c)   Owner's Use of Agents.
      (1)   Designation of Agent.
         (i)   An Owner can designate an Agent to act on the Owner's behalf to
operate a Licensed Taxicab and perform all required functions.
         (ii)   The Agent must be licensed by the Commission in under with
Chapter 63 of these Rules.
         (iii)   The designation will remain in effect until:
            A.   The Owner revokes the designation and notifies the Commission,
or
            B.   The Commission suspends or revokes the Agent's License and
notifies the Owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - 1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-18(c)(1) days
 
      (2)   File Designation with the Commission. Prior to the use of an Agent,
an Owner must file a designation of the Agent with the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-18(c)(2)
 
      (3)   Owner Can Use Only One Agent. An Owner must not designate or use
more than one Agent regardless of the number of Medallions in which Owner has
an interest.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-18(c)(3)
 
   (d)   Limitations on Owner's Use of an Agent.
      (1)   Agent's Personal Oversight Required. An Owner can designate or use
an Agent, only if the Agent operates the Taxicab(s) through:
         (i)   Personal observation of the vehicle(s),
         (ii)   Personal oversight of compliance with inspection, insurance and
all other regulatory requirements, and
         (iii)   Personal communications with Drivers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-18(d)(1)
 
      (2)   Agent Must Not Assign Responsibilities. An Owner can allow an Agent
to use employees to assist in fulfilling these functions, however the Owner
must NOT permit the Agent to delegate or assign its responsibilities to another
party; Owner's designation of an Agent will be ineffective if the Agent
delegates to another party.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-18(d)(2)
 
      (3)   Must Maintain Business Premises. The Owner must ensure that the
Agent maintains business premises meeting the requirements set forth in both 35
RCNY §
58-17 and 35 RCNY §
63-10.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-18(d)(3)
 
      (4)   Owner Must Not Use Unlicensed Agent.
         (i)   An Owner must not designate or continue to use an Agent if the
Commission has notified the Owner that the specified Agent's License is
suspended or revoked.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $500 - 1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
58-18(d)(4)(i) 30 days
 
         (ii)   The Commission will issue a directive to Owners to discontinue
use of a specified Agent (a Stop-Use Directive) by mailing notification to the
Owner's personal address.
         (iii)   The Commission will maintain a list of all Agents whose
Licenses are currently suspended or revoked. This information is available for
inspection by the public, and the Commission strongly suggests that Owners
review these lists before selecting an Agent.
         (iv)   If an Owner seeks to designate an Agent who is the subject of a
current Stop-Use Directive, the Commission will reject the designation and
inform the Owner that the Agent's License is suspended or revoked.
      (5)   Provisions of this Section Cannot be Waived by Contract.
         (i)   No contract or other agreement between an Owner and an Agent
will include a provision intended to supersede or impair the effectiveness, in
whole or in part, of the provisions of this 35 RCNY §
58-18(d).
         (ii)   No provision in a contract or other agreement between an Owner
and an Agent that attempts to impair the effectiveness of this section will be
enforceable.
§ 58-19 Operations – Service Requirements (Passengers).
[Reserved.]
§ 58-20 Operations – Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Maximum Driving Hours. An Owner must not require a Driver to operate
one or more Taxicabs for more than 12 consecutive hours.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-20(a)
 
   (b)   Repealed. 
   (c)   Repealed. 
(Amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-21 Leasing a Taxicab or Medallion.
   (a)   An Owner can lease a Taxicab (or a Medallion-only) to a Licensed
Driver, or to Licensed Drivers working different shifts or days if the Owner
complies with the provision of this section.
      (1)   Regardless of the terms of the lease, the Owner is responsible for
complying with all laws, rules and regulations governing Owners.
      (2)   An Owner must not authorize or allow a lessee of a Taxicab under 35
RCNY §§
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2) of these Rules to sublease the Taxicab to another party.
      (3)   Written records required under this section must be provided to
Driver and must be maintained in either a hard copy or electronic format.
 
            Fine: $75 - $150 for the first violation,
35 RCNY §  $150 - $300 for a second violation,
58-21(a)    $300 - $500 for a third violation within 24 Appearance REQUIRED
            months, and
            Suspension until compliance
 
   (b)   Service and Maintenance of Leased Taxicab Vehicles.
      (1)   Service and maintenance of a leased Taxicab (including the vehicle)
under 35 RCNY §§
58-21(c)(1) and (c)(2) is the responsibility of the Owner/lessor, and the cost
of the service and maintenance of the Vehicle cannot be charged to the Driver/
lessee.
      (2)   The lease of a Medallion-only under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3) or a lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) does not include, and does not require, the Medallion Owner/lessor
to provide service and maintenance of the vehicle.
      (3)   A Medallion-only lessor under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3) or a lessor under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) must not require the lessee to obtain service and maintenance from
any particular provider, including, but not limited to, the Medallion Owner or
any agent of the Medallion Owner. Medallion lessor or Agent who provides
services or accommodations outside the lease to a leasing driver must reduce
the agreement to writing, in clear and unambiguous language, and signed by the
parties. A Medallion lessor or Agent who provides services or accommodations
outside the lease to a leasing driver must keep records of all transactions
with that driver and such records must be available for inspection by the
Chairperson.
 
            First violation $500
            Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 and/or
            suspension of the Medallion for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §  In addition to the penalty payable to the       Appearance REQUIRED
58-21(b)    Commission, the administrative law judge must
            order the owner to pay restitution to the
            driver, equal to the excess that was charged to
            the driver.
 
   (c)   Rate Rules.
      (1)   Standard Lease Cap Rates. An Owner of a Taxicab can charge a lease
rate to a Driver that is not greater than the following Standard Lease Caps:
         (i)   The Standard Lease Cap for a Medallion and vehicle for one shift
will not exceed:
            A.   $105, for all 12-hour day shifts
            B.   $115, for the 12-hour night shift on Sunday, Monday and
Tuesday
            C.   $120, for the 12-hour night shift on Wednesday
            D.   $129, for the 12-hour night shifts on Thursday, Friday and
Saturday
            E.   $630, for any one-week day shift for one week or longer
            F.   $737 for any one week night shift for one week or longer.
         (ii)   Except for a driver who meets all of the following:
            (A)   the driver pays for the lease on a daily or shift basis and
is not required to pay for more than one shift in advance;
            (B)   the driver is required to return the vehicle to the owner or
operator's business premises or other mutually agreed upon location at the
conclusion of each shift; and
            (C)   the driver is not required to pay for any shift for which he
provides the owner or operator with timely notice that he will not lease the
vehicle, so the owner can lease the vehicle to another daily shift driver, no
driver leasing a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph
58-21(c)(1) can be charged more than a total of
               A.   $630, for six or more day shifts in any seven consecutive
day period
               B.   $737, for six or more evening shifts or combination of day
and evening shifts in any seven consecutive day period.
               C.   A Driver who meets all the requirements of (ii)(A) - (C)
can be charged for seven shifts if the Driver leases seven shifts.
         (iii)   The lease of a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph 35
RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) includes service and maintenance. Service and maintenance of the
vehicle is the responsibility of the lessor and the lessor and his or her Agent
must not charge the lessee for service and maintenance costs for the vehicle.
         (iv)   The lessee of a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph 35
RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) is not responsible for payment of any Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
         (v)   For a driver with a weekly lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)(E), or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)(F), if the vehicle is unavailable for use for any reason that is
not the lessee's responsibility during any part of any week, the payment of the
Lease Cap must be pro-rated.
         (vi)   For a driver with a weekly lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)(E) or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)(F), the lease includes costs for collision and other damage
coverage, including repairs of physical damage to the vehicle, except that it
shall not be considered an overcharge prohibited under these Rules if the Owner
of a Taxicab or his or her Agent and the driver agree in writing that the
driver will make payments for damage to the vehicle caused by the driver's
negligence and such agreement will remain in effect for only so long as the
driver is leasing a medallion from the Owner or the Agent, provided that the
lease contains language informing the driver that he or she will be responsible
for physical damage to the vehicle caused by his or her negligence if such
damage was in fact caused by the negligence of the driver. If the Owner
receives compensation for damages to the vehicle incurred from an entity other
than the driver, any amount previously paid by the driver as compensation for
damages, must be refunded to the driver.
         (vii)   For a Driver with a daily lease operating under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)(A)-(D), the lessor may offer pro-rated leases for shifts of
under 12 hours. The lessor must pro-rate the lease if the vehicle is
unavailable for use for any reason that is not the lessee's responsibility
during any part of the 12 hour shift, including the return of the vehicle from
the previous shift.
      (2)   Cost Adjustments for the Lease of Hybrid Electric Taxicabs.
         (i)   The Standard Lease Cap for Hybrid Electric Taxicabs and Diesel-
Fueled Taxicabs that are hacked-up under 35 RCNY §§
67-05 or
67-05.1C and that meet the requirements of § 19-533 of the Administrative Code
are raised by $3 per shift ($21 per week), so that the lease amount for one
shift must not now exceed:
            A.   $108, for all 12-hour day shifts
            B.   $118, for the 12-hour night shift on Sunday, Monday and
Tuesday
            C.   $123, for the 12-hour night shift on Wednesday
            D.   $132, for the 12-hour night shifts on Thursday, Friday and
Saturday.
            E.   $648, for any one-week day shift for one week or longer
            F.   $755, for any one week night shift for one week or longer.
         (ii)   Except for a driver who meets all of the following:
            (A)   the driver pays for the lease on a daily or shift basis and
is not required to pay for more than one shift in advance;
            (B)   the driver is required to return the vehicle to the owner or
operator's business premises or other mutually agreed upon location at the
conclusion of each shift; and
            (C)   the driver is not required to pay for any shift for which he
provides the owner or operator with timely notice that he will not lease the
vehicle, so the owner can lease the vehicle to another daily shift driver, no
driver leasing a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2) can be charged more than a total of
               A.   $648, for six or more day shifts in any seven consecutive
day period
               B.   $755, for six or more evening shifts or combination of day
and evening shifts in any seven consecutive day period.
               C.   A Driver who meets all the requirements of (ii)(A) - (C)
can be charged for seven shifts if the Driver leases seven shifts.
         (iii)   The lease of a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph 35
RCNY §
58-21(c)(2) includes service and maintenance. Service and maintenance of the
vehicle is the responsibility of the lessor and the lessor and his or her Agent
must not charge the lessee for service and maintenance costs for the vehicle.
         (iv)   The lessee of a medallion and vehicle under this paragraph 35
RCNY §
58-21(c)(2) is not responsible for payment of any Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
         (v)   For a driver with a weekly lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i)(E) or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i)(F), if the vehicle is unavailable for use for any reason that is
not the lessee's responsibility during any part of any week, the payment of the
Lease Cap must be pro-rated.
         (vi)   For a driver with a weekly lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i)(E) or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i)(F), the lease includes costs for collision and other damage
coverage, including repairs of physical damage to the vehicle, except that it
shall not be considered an overcharge prohibited under these Rules if the Owner
of a Taxicab or his or her Agent and the driver agree in writing that the
driver will make payments for damage to the vehicle caused by the driver's
negligence and such agreement will remain in effect for only so long as the
driver is leasing a medallion from the Owner or the Agent, provided that the
lease contains language informing the driver that he or she will be responsible
for physical damage to the vehicle caused by his or her negligence if such
damage was in fact caused by the negligence of the driver. If the Owner
receives compensation for damages to the vehicle incurred from an entity other
than the driver, any amount previously paid by the driver as compensation for
damages, must be refunded to the driver.
         (vii)   For a Driver with a daily lease operating under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i)(A)-(D), the lessor may offer pro-rated leases for shifts of
under 12 hours. The lessor must pro-rate the lease if the vehicle is
unavailable for use for any reason that is not the lessee's responsibility
during any part of the 12 hour shift, including the return of the vehicle from
the previous shift.
      (3)   The Standard Lease Cap:
         (i)   For a Medallion-only Hybrid Taxicab, Hacked-up under 35 RCNY §§
67-05 or
67-05.1C and that meet the requirements of § 19-533 of the Administrative Code
is $994 weekly.
         (ii)   For all other Medallion-only Taxicabs, (including Accessible
Taxicabs), is $952 weekly, except that if the Medallion Owner must place an
Accessible Taxicab into service as required under subdivisions (a) through (c)
or (e) of 35 RCNY §
58-50, or is currently receiving payments under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(2), the weekly lease for that Accessible Taxicab shall include a
credit to the Driver of $77 per week for the four year period of time required
in 35 RCNY §
58-50(f). This reduction is the result of the Medallion Owner's receipt of
payment under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(1)(ii) and (j)(2).
         (iii)   A medallion lessor or Agent of a lessor must not require a
medallion lessee to obtain service, repairs or maintenance of the vehicle from
any particular provider, including, but not limited to, a lessor or an Agent of
a lessor.
         (iv)   A lease, and payment of the Lease Cap under this paragraph
includes (and all of the following must be provided to the lessee):
            A.   Use of the medallion;
            B.   All applicable TLC fees except for TLC vehicle inspection fees
(but the lessor is not required to provide vehicle registration or payment of
the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax);
            C.   Insurance required by 35 RCNY §
58-13;
            D.   Credit card fees or charges;
            E.   Up to 3 drivers on a lease at the request of the drivers,
which request cannot be unreasonably denied.
         A lessor must not accept any payment from a lessee for the purchase or
lease of a vehicle. A Medallion lessor or Agent can agree with a driver to
provide services or accommodations on an arms-length basis outside the lease,
as long as the agreement is in writing, in clear and unambiguous language, and
signed by the parties. A Medallion lessor or Agent who provides services or
accommodations outside the lease to a leasing driver must keep records of all
transactions with that driver and such records must be available for inspection
by the Chairperson. A Medallion lessor may not enter into a lease with any
person or entity under this paragraph if such Medallion lessor holds more than
2% of shares in a publicly held corporation that sells, leases or finances
vehicles and has accepted a payment from such person or entity related to the
sale, lease or finance of the Vehicle of such person or entity.
         (v)   The gasoline surcharge option provided in paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(6) is not available to Owners/lessors leasing a Medallion-only under
this 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3)
      (4)   Standard Medallion Lease Cap including Long Term Vehicle Lease/
Conditional Purchase.
         (i)   A Lease is covered by this paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) if it includes all of the following:
            A.   The lease of a Medallion
            B.   The conditional purchase agreement for a vehicle; and
            C.   The vehicle is being conditionally sold to the driver/lessee
by any of
               1.   The Owner of the Medallion or any employee of the Owner,
and/or
               2.   The Owner's Agent or any employee of the Agent, and/or
               3.   Any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
the Owner or Agent, or an employee of Owner or Agent, is a Business Entity
Person
               4.   For purposes of this paragraph, an individual, business
entity or business entity person covered by subitems one through three of this
item C who is leasing a Medallion to a lessee and who holds more than 2% of the
shares in a publicly held corporation that sells, leases or finances vehicles
and has accepted a payment from such lessee related to the sale, lease or
finance of such lessee's vehicle is deemed to be a party to the vehicle
financing arrangement. Accordingly, the total amount charged to the lessee for
both the lease of the Medallion and for the sale, lease, or financing of the
vehicle cannot exceed the amount of the Standard Lease Cap set forth in
subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph.
         (ii)   The Standard Lease Cap under this section for a Taxicab
Medallion and vehicle is
            A.   $994 weekly for the lease of the Medallion, if the vehicle
complies with the requirements of 35 RCNY §§
67-05 or
67-05.1C and meets the requirements of § 19-533 of the Administrative Code,
plus $275 weekly for the portion of the lease covering the conditional purchase
of the vehicle; or
            B.   $952 weekly for the lease of the Medallion, if the vehicle
complies with the requirements of 35 RCNY §§
67-05.1 or
67-05.2, plus $275 weekly for the portion of the lease covering the conditional
purchase of the vehicle, except that if the Medallion Owner must place an
Accessible Taxicab into service as required under subdivisions (a) through (c)
or (e) of 35 RCNY §
58-50, or is currently receiving payments under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(2), the weekly lease for that Accessible Taxicab shall include a
credit to the driver of $77 per week for the four year period of time required
in 35 RCNY §
58-50(f). This reduction is the result of the Medallion Owner's receipt of
payment under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(1)(ii) and (j)(2).
            C.   This Standard Lease Cap cannot be charged at any time after
title to the vehicle passes (or could have passed) to the lessee such that
total payments by the lessee for the vehicle shall not exceed $42,900.
         (iii)   Title to the leased vehicle must pass to one or more of the
lessees, if the lessees request, after all vehicle financing costs have been
paid. The conditional seller is not required to transfer title if the lessees
have failed to pay all payments due for the vehicle purchase and lease until
all such payments have been made.
         (iv)   The lease of a Medallion together with a vehicle under this
paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) includes within the payment to the lessor the amount due by the
Vehicle owner for the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
         (v)   A lease, and payment of the Lease Cap under this section
includes (and the following must be provided to the lessee, except that items G
and H are optional):
            A.   Use of the medallion;
            B.   All applicable TLC and NYS DMV fees except for TLC vehicle
inspection fees;
            C.   Insurance required by 35 RCNY §
58-13;
            D.   Credit card fees or charges;
            E.   All Vehicle purchase and/or finance costs and vehicle sales
tax and related costs;
            F.   Up to 3 drivers on a lease at the request of the drivers,
which request cannot be unreasonably denied.
            G.   A Medallion lessor or Agent can offer coverage for collisions
and physical damage to the vehicle to the lessee/purchasers in an amount not to
exceed $50 per week, but cannot require that the lessee/purchasers purchase
such coverage.
               i.   The Medallion lessor or Agent can require that a deductible
of up to $250 per incident be met before covering or reimbursing costs
identified in item G.
               ii.   For any incident for which a driver has paid a deductible
amount authorized under this subsection, if the Medallion lessor or Agent of
the taxicab which is the subject of the damages claim receives insurance claim
proceeds, litigation proceeds or other proceeds to cover the cost of repair,
the lessor must reimburse the driver for the amount previously remitted as a
deductible.
            H.   A Medallion lessor or Agent can agree with a driver to provide
services or accommodations on an arm's-length basis outside the lease, as long
as that agreement is in writing, in clear and unambiguous language, and signed
by the parties. A Medallion lessor or Agent who provides services or
accommodations outside the lease to a leasing driver must keep records of all
transactions with that driver and such records must be available for inspection
by the Chairperson or his or her designee.
            I.   If the Driver does not opt to receive coverage for collisions
and physical damage pursuant to G above, and a Medallion lessor or Agent
receives compensation for damages to the vehicle incurred from an entity other
than the Driver, any amount previously paid by the Driver as compensation for
damages or paid by the Driver in order to repair damages to the vehicle must be
refunded to the Driver.
         (vi)   The gasoline surcharge option provided in 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(6) is not available to Owners/lessors leasing a Taxicab and vehicle
under this 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4).
         (vii)   If the vehicle is unavailable for use for any reason that is
not the lessee's responsibility during any part of any week, the lessee's
payment of the Lease Cap must be pro-rated. As an example, a vehicle is not
unavailable for purposes of this rule if the vehicle is undergoing required
maintenance, undergoing repairs as a result of not being properly maintained,
or required to appear for inspection at the TLC.
      (5)   Limits on Additional Charges. In addition to a lease amount no
greater than the Standard Lease Cap (as adjusted), an Owner/lessor (as well as
any agent or employee of the Owner/lessor) must not request of or accept from
any lessee any money or other thing of value, except for the following (this
means an Owner/lessor must not charge any tip, tax, surcharge or other fee of
any kind above the Standard Lease Cap (as adjusted):
         (i)   A gas surcharge of $21 per shift (or $126 for drivers leasing
under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i) E or F and 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2)(i) E or F (with such surcharge to be adjusted as provided below)
provided that the Owner/lessor or his or her agent is providing gasoline to the
lessee as provided in 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(6);
         (ii)   A security deposit and deductions from the security deposit no
greater than the amount allowed under subdivision (e) below;
         (iii)   The discount toll amount for use of the Owner's EZ-Pass® as
described in 35 RCNY §
58-27;
         (iv)   Late Charges
            A.   For any vehicle leased pursuant 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(2), a late charge not to exceed $25.00 per hour for the late return of
a vehicle. The total late charge for the late return of a vehicle from any one
shift may not exceed the cost of one shift.
            B.   For any vehicle leased pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3) or 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) a late charge not to exceed $50.00 for each weekly lease payment
paid late. A late charge can be imposed only if the weekly lease payment is not
received within 24 hours of the date and time on which it is due.
         (v)   A cancellation charge, subject to the provisions of subdivision
(i)(5) below;
         (vi)   Parking tickets and red light violations permitted to be
deducted from the security deposit described in subdivision (e) below, provided
that the Driver/lessee is allowed to challenge any ticket or violation; and
         (vii)   If the Owner (or Owner's Agent) is a Taxpayer, the Taxpayer
can collect the MTA Tax collected by the lessee/Driver from the lessee/Driver.
The MTA Tax must be collected in the following order:
            A.   The MTA Tax must first be deducted from any credit card
reimbursements due as required in subdivision (f) below.
            B.   The MTA Tax must next be deducted from the security deposit
permitted in subdivision (e) below.
            C.   If not fully paid, then the MTA Tax must be collected from the
lessee/Driver.
         (viii)   In addition to these charges, an Owner can deduct from credit
card receipts payable to the Driver amounts collected by the Technology System
Provider, pursuant to the Technology System Provider's authorization by the
Commission, provided that
            A.   such amounts are provided by rule of the Commission; and
            B.   such amounts are timely remitted to the Owner's Technology
System Provider or other recipient as approved by the TLC.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $1,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
58-21(c)(5)(viii)(B) compliance
 
         (ix)   State and local sales and rental taxes on vehicle rentals.
         (x)   If contained in the lease, a provision for the recovery of
reasonable damages for a breach of the lease contract, including attorneys'
fees and costs. Fines paid to the Commission by an Owner or Agent cannot be
recovered from a driver as reasonable damages, except for
            A.   fines incurred as a result of a sublease prohibited by 35 RCNY
§
58-21(a)(2), or,
            B.   for drivers leasing under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3) or (c)(4), fines incurred as a result of unauthorized operation by
a suspended or revoked driver, or
            C.   fines imposed on the owner for violation of 35 RCNY §
58-29(b), provided that such fine was assessed because of the conduct of the
driver and provided the owner is able to show that the driver had notice of the
inspection date, or
            D.   fines imposed on the owner for violation of 35 RCNY §
58-31(a).
         (xi)   Credit Card Processing Surcharge for Leases entered into
pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1),
58-21(c)(2),
58-21(c)(3), or
58-21(c)(4):
            A.   For daily leases under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) and
58-21(c)(2), an Owner of a Taxicab can charge a $7 surcharge per shift for
credit card processing.
            B.   For weekly leases under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1),
58-21(c)(2),
58-21(c)(3), and
58-21(c)(4), an Owner of a Taxicab can charge a $49 surcharge per week for
credit card processing.
         (xii)   Beginning on January 1, 2015, the Taxicab Improvement
Surcharge, which must be paid as provided in 35 RCNY §
66-25.
      (6)   Optional Gasoline Surcharge: An Owner/lessor, or his or her Agent
leasing a Taxicab under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2), may chose to provide gasoline to a lessee and charge a gas
surcharge in an amount as specified in this section in addition to the Lease
Cap provided in 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2), provided that
         (i)   Gasoline is provided to the lessee for the entire shift at no
additional cost to the lessee.
         (ii)   The surcharge will be $126 per week (or $21 per shift) until
December 31, 2012
         (iii)   After that date the surcharge will be reset based on the
trailing 6 month average as of the date the surcharge is calculated of the New
York City Gasoline Price Index issued by U.S. Energy Information Agency and
published at www.eia.gov.
         (iv)   The surcharge will be calculated as of June 30 and November 30
of each year beginning November 30, 2012.
         (v)   The Commission will post the new surcharge on its Web site by
July 15 and December 15 of each year
         (vi)   The new surcharge will take effect on July 31 and December 31
of each year beginning December 31, 2012. If the Commission has not posted a
new surcharge, the prior surcharge will remain in effect.
         (vii)   Based on the index, the surcharge will be as follows:
                   The surcharge for Hybrid   The surcharge for all other
When the Index is: Electric and Diesel-Fueled taxicabs will be:
                   taxicabs will be:
                   The surcharge for Hybrid   The surcharge for all other
When the Index is: Electric and Diesel-Fueled taxicabs will be:
                   taxicabs will be:
$2.49 or less      $13 per shift (or $78 per  $16 per shift (or $96 per week)
                   week)
$2.50 to $2.99     $16 per shift (or $96 per  $19 per shift (or $114 per
                   week)                      week)
$3.00 to $3.49     $18 per shift (or $108 per $21 per shift (or $126 per
                   week)                      week)
$3.50 to $3.99     $21 per shift (or $126 per $24 per shift (or $144 per
                   week)                      week)
$4.00 to $4.49     $23 per shift (or $138 per $26 per shift (or $156 per
                   week)                      week)
$4.50 to $4.99     $26 per shift (or $156 per $29 per shift (or $174 per
                   week)                      week)
$5.00 or more      $28 per shift (or $168 per $31 per shift (or $186 per
                   week)                      week)
 
         (viii)   Nothing in paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(6) prohibits an Owner/lessor, or his or her Agent leasing a Taxicab
under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2) from selling gasoline to a lessee independent of any lease payments
made under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2) as long as such transactions are recorded and available for
inspection as required by 35 RCNY §
58-21(b)(3).
 
            Fine: First violation: $500
            Second and subsequent violations; $1,000 and/or
            suspension of the Medallion for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §  In addition to the penalty payable to the       Appearance REQUIRED
58-21(c)    Commission, the ALJ must order the Owner to pay
            restitution to the Driver, equal to the excess
            that was charged to the Driver or the extra
            fuel the driver had to pay for.
 
      (7)   Collective Bargaining Exception to the Standard Lease Cap. The
provisions of this section do not apply to Owners and lease Drivers whose
business relationship is governed by the terms of a collective bargaining
agreement that regulates the subject of lease prices.
   (d)   [Reserved.]
   (e)   Security Deposit on Taxicab Vehicles.
      (1)   Security Deposit Provision Permitted. An Owner can include a lease
provision for a security deposit from the Driver, provided it complies with the
requirements of this subdivision (e).
      (2)   Permitted Withholdings from Security Deposit. At the termination or
expiration of a lease an Owner may be reimbursed from the security deposit only
for the following:
         (i)   Any unpaid but owing lease charges.
         (ii)   Damage to the vehicle, if the lease clearly and prominently
states that the Driver is responsible for damage.
         (iii)   Any parking tickets issued during the lease.
         (iv)   Any red light violations issued to the Owner during the lease,
under the NYC Department of Transportation's camera surveillance system.
         (v)   If the Owner (or Owner's Agent) is a Taxpayer, any MTA Tax
remaining due from the Driver after deductions from credit card receipts due to
the Driver.
      (3)   Deposit Not to be Used for Owner Violations. An Owner must not
require a Driver to pay any summons that is written to the Owner as Respondent,
other than those specified above.
 
            Fine: First violation: $250;
            Second violation: $350;
            Third and subsequent violations $500 and/or
            suspension of the Medallion for up to thirty
            days.
35 RCNY §  In addition to the penalty payable to the       Appearance REQUIRED
58-21(e)(3) Commission, the ALJ must order the Owner to pay
            restitution to the Driver, equal to the excess
            that was withheld from the Driver, or equal to
            the amount that the Driver paid, at the
            requirement of the Owner, to satisfy any
            summons against the Owner.
 
      (4)   Limits on Amount of Deposit. An Owner must not require a Driver to
post any security deposit that is greater in amount than the rate for one lease
term. However, if the lease term is for more than one week, an Owner must not
require a Driver to pay a security deposit in an amount greater than the lease
rate for one week. Examples include:
         (i)   An Owner who leases a Taxicab for one shift at the rate of $80
per shift can require up to an $80 security deposit.
         (ii)   An Owner who leases a Taxicab or Medallion for one week at the
rate of $500 a week can require up to a $500 security deposit.
         (iii)   An Owner who leases a Taxicab for six months at the rate of
$2,000 a month can require up to a $500 security deposit.
         (iv)   Special Rule for Long Term leases under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4).
            A.   A Lease under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) can include a refundable deposit of up to $5,000, which may be
collected at the beginning of the lease or in scheduled payments over time as
specified in the lease. An Owner or an Owner's Agent must not accept any
deposit in excess of this amount.
            B.   The weekly lease payment specified in 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4) must be credited by an amount equal to the prorated value of the
refundable deposit, except that until the lease ends, a deposit equal to the
deposit that could be required for a lease of a Medallion under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(3)(i) or (ii), as applicable, can be retained by the Owner/lessor or
his or her Agent.
            C.   If the deposit is not fully credited against the lease because
of a cancellation, any remaining, uncredited deposit shall be refunded to the
lessee/driver within 30 days of termination or cancellation of the lease by the
lessor or an Agent of lessor. Note: this does not apply when the driver breaks
or terminates the lease prior to the term. The deposit shall be held, and
interest shall accrue, in the manner prescribed by 35 RCNY §
58-21(e)(7).
 
            Fine: $200
            In addition to the penalty payable to the
35 RCNY §  Commission, the Hearing Officer must order Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(e)(4) the lessor to pay restitution to the
            Driver, equal to the amount charged to the
            Driver in violation of this rule.
 
      (5)   Provide Driver Written Receipt and Accounting for Security Deposit.
         (i)   An Owner must provide written receipts for any security deposits
made by a Driver.
         (ii)   An Owner must provide a Driver with a written itemization of
any items withheld or deducted from a security deposit.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(e)(5)
 
      (6)   Return Deposit within 30 Days of Lease Termination.
         (i)   An Owner must return a security deposit no later than 30 days
after the end of the lease term.
         (ii)   An Owner must return a security deposit either by check or by
cash exchanged for a written receipt from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $50
            In addition to the penalty payable to the
35 RCNY §  Commission, the Hearing Officer must order  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(e)(6) the lessor to pay restitution to the
            Driver, equal to the amount not returned to
            the Driver in violation of this rule.
 
      (7)   Interest on Security Deposit.
         (i)   An Owner who requires a security deposit must secure the funds
in an interest-bearing account in a bank or credit union within the City of New
York, in an account devoted to security deposits and not commingled with funds
of the Owner.
         (ii)   The Owner must indicate in writing provided to the Driver the
name and address of the bank or credit union and the applicable account number.
         (iii)   Interest on the security deposit must accrue to the benefit of
the Driver furnishing the security, except, however, that the Owner can retain
one percentage point of any interest, as compensation for bookkeeping expenses.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(e)(7)
 
      (8)   Collective Bargaining Agreement Exception to Limitations on
Security Deposits. The provisions of this section do not apply to Owners and
lease Drivers whose business relationship is governed by the terms of a
collective bargaining agreement that regulates the subject of security
deposits.
   (f)   Non-Cash Payments.
      (1)   For any lease of a Taxicab (vehicle and Medallion) under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1) or
58-21(c)(2), an Owner (or Owner's Agent) must pay a Driver, on a daily basis,
the total amount of all non-cash payments, including E-Payments through the
Technology System (if any), made during the Driver's shift, less the Taxicab
Improvement Surcharge payable to the Taxicab Improvement Fund as set forth in
35 RCNY §
66-25. For trips provided in WAV vehicles, the Taxicab Improvement Driver
Incentive Payment will be paid directly to the Driver at the time and in the
manner required by the Commission. Drivers leasing a Taxicab on a weekly basis
under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(1)(i)E,
58-21(c)(1)(i)F,
58-21(c)(2)(i)E or
58-21(c)(2)(i)F may, at the Driver's discretion, be paid on a weekly basis.
Payments to a Driver and access to these funds must be provided at no cost to
the Driver. An Owner or the Owner’s Agent must:
         (i)   Pay the Driver, including any sublessee Drivers, and if the
Owner or the Owner’s Agent delegates or assigns this responsibility to another
party, the Owner or the Owner’s Agent shall be responsible for making full
payment to the Driver if any designee or assignee fails to pay the Driver as
required, and Driver reports non-payment to the Owner or Owner’s Agent within
90 days of non-payment.
      (2)   For any lease not described in paragraph (1), an Owner (or Owner's
Agent) must pay the Driver, on no less than a weekly basis, the total amount of
all non-cash payments, including E-Payments through the Technology System (if
any), made during that period, less the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge payable
to the Taxicab Improvement Fund as set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-25. For trips provided in WAV vehicles, the Taxicab Improvement Driver
Incentive Payment will be paid directly to the Driver at the time and in the
manner required by the Commission. Payments to a Driver and access to these
funds must be provided at no cost to the Driver. An Owner or the Owner’s Agent
must:
         (i)   Pay the Driver, including any sublessee Drivers, and if the
Owner or Owner’s Agent delegates or assigns this responsibility to another
party, the Owner or the Owner’s Agent shall be responsible for making full
payment to the Driver if any designee or assignee fails to pay the Driver as
required, and Driver reports non-payment to the Owner or the Owner’s Agent
within 90 days of non-payment.
 
                  Fine: $100
                  In addition to the penalty payable to
35 RCNY §        the Commission, the ALJ must order    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(f)(1) & (2) the Owner to pay restitution to the
                  Driver, equal to the cost to the
                  Driver.
 
      (3)   An Owner (or Owner's Agent) must not withhold from the payments any
credit card pass-along, fees or charges.
 
            Fine: First violation: $200
            Second violation: $300
35 RCNY §  Third violation: $500
58-21(f)(3) In addition to the penalty payable to the       Appearance REQUIRED
            Commission, the ALJ must order the Owner to pay
            restitution to the Driver, equal to the excess
            amount that was charged to the Driver.
 
      (4)   If an Owner (or Owner's Agent) is a Taxpayer, the Taxpayer can
deduct from the credit card receipts payable to the Driver the amount due for
the MTA Tax from the Driver's trips.
      (5)   An Owner can deduct from credit card receipts payable to the Driver
amounts retained by or payable to the the Technology System Provider, provided
that such amounts are provided for by rule of the Commission.
   (g)   Receipts to Drivers for All Payments.
      (1)   An Owner (or Owner's Agent) must give a Driver a written receipt
for every payment or deduction made under the lease and these Rules.
      (2)   The receipt must include the name of the Driver and the number of
the Medallion subject to the lease.
      (3)   The receipt must clearly state the following information with
respect to the payment or deduction:
         (i)   The date
         (ii)   The name of the recipient
         (iii)   The amount
         (iv)   The purpose
         (v)   The number of the section of this chapter that authorizes the
payment or deduction
         (vi)   For leases under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4), the following additional information:
            A.   The weekly amount received, itemized by the amount paid for
the Taxicab Medallion portion of the lease and the amount paid for the
conditional purchase of the vehicle;
            B.   The cumulative amount paid towards the conditional purchase of
the vehicle;
            C.   The remaining amount to be paid for the conditional purchase
of the vehicle; and
            D.   The remaining number of weekly payments for the conditional
purchase of the vehicle based on the current contract terms.
            E.   For leases of Medallions for which the Medallion Owner must
place an Accessible Taxicab into service as required under subdivisions (a)
through (c) or (e) of 35 RCNY §
58-50 or is currently receiving payments under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(2), a credit to the Driver in the weekly payment in the amount of $77
as a result of the Medallion Owner's receipt of payment under 35 RCNY §
58-50(j)(1)(ii).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200
58-21(g)
 
   (h)   Lease Must Be in Writing.
      (1)   Every Taxicab operating lease (including any amendments), must be
in writing, and must be signed by the Owner (or a person authorized to act on
behalf of the Owner), and by the leasing Driver or Drivers. The lease must be
written in clear and unambiguous language. Electronic signatures are
permissible for electronic leases.
      (2)   A copy of the fully executed lease must be provided to the leasing
Driver or Drivers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(h)
 
   (i)   Terms. Every lease must contain the following terms:
      (1)   The type and term of the lease. The lease must state the beginning
date and time of the lease and the ending date and time of the lease.
         (i)   A weekly lease must run for seven consecutive calendar days.
         (ii)   A shift must run for 12 consecutive hours.
      (2)   Costs covered by the lease. The lease must state the total lease
amount, and must itemize that total cost, including:
         (i)   The amount of the lease that applies to the medallion and the
amount, if any, that applies to the vehicle
         (ii)   The amounts, if any, of the security deposit
         (iii)   The gasoline surcharge if there is one
         (iv)   For leases under 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4), the vehicle sales price and an itemized total of all other fees
and costs to be paid before title to the vehicle will be passed to the Driver
         (v)   Any other costs that the Driver will be charged.
      (3)   Reference Authorizing Rule Sections.
         (i)   For each itemized cost listed above (in subparagraph (2)), the
lease must include a reference to the Commission Rule authorizing the Owner to
charge the cost to the Driver.
         (ii)   The lease must either recite the complete text of each Rule or
state the address of the Commission's Web page on which the Rule is published.
      (4)   Overcharges. Every lease must contain clearly legible notice that
overcharging a lessee/Driver is prohibited by the Commission's Rules, and that
complaints of overcharges may be made in writing to the Commission or by
telephone call to 311.
      (5)   Charges Upon Cancellation.
         (i)   If an Agent demands the return of a Medallion upon the request
of an Owner, the Driver has the right to request the Agent to provide a
replacement Medallion and, if the Agent provides another Medallion, the Driver
will not be responsible for the costs of hacking up a replacement vehicle.
         (ii)   Limits on Cancellation Charge. For any daily or weekly lease of
a taxicab (vehicle and medallion) an Owner must not require a Driver to pay a
cancellation charge that is greater in amount than the rate for one lease term.
However, if the lease term is for more than one week, an Owner must not require
a Driver to pay a cancellation charge in an amount greater than the lease rate
for one week. Examples include:
            A.   An Owner who leases a Taxicab or Medallion for one shift at
the rate of $80 per shift can require up to an $80 cancellation charge.
            B.   An Owner who leases a Taxicab or Medallion for one week at the
rate of $500 a week can require up to a $500 cancellation charge.
         (iii)   A cancellation charge will only be permitted where the lease
also provides that:
            A.   Owner can only charge a Driver a cancellation charge if the
Driver is late in making lease payments at the time the Driver cancels the
lease.
            B.   When a cancellation payment is made, the Driver's obligation
to make lease payments terminates immediately.
      (6)   Deposit information. Each lease must include the information
regarding deposits required by 35 RCNY §
58-21(e).
      (7)   No Driver Lease Payments through Technology System. An owner may
not allow a driver to use the driver's personal credit card to make a lease
payment pursuant to this section utilizing the Technology System.
 
            Fine: First violation $500
            Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 and/or
            suspension of the Medallion for up to thirty
35 RCNY §  days.
58-21(i)    In addition to the penalty payable to the       Appearance REQUIRED
            Commission, the administrative law judge must
            order the owner to pay restitution to the
            driver, equal to the excess or non-authorized
            charge that was charged to the driver.
 
   (j)   Retaliation.
      (1)   An Owner must not retaliate against any Driver for making a good
faith complaint against any Owner for violation of the leasing provisions in 35
RCNY §
58-21.
      (2)   "Retaliation" will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first offense and a fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-21(j)    of $10,000 plus restitution to the driver
            for the second offense within five years.
(Amended City Record 9/25/2015, eff. 10/25/2015; amended City Record 10/23/
2015, eff. 11/22/2015; amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016; amended
City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/
16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 2/
12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended
City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/
2024; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 58-22 Records – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Record of Passenger Trip Information. The Trip Record is the record of
all data collected from every for hire trip made by a Taxicab and must include
the following information:
      (1)   The Taxicab Medallion number
      (2)   The TLC Driver License number
      (3)   The location where each passenger is picked up
      (4)   The time each passenger is picked up
      (5)   The total number of passengers
      (6)   The location where each passenger is dropped off
      (7)   The time each passenger is dropped off
      (8)   The total trip mileage
      (9)   The itemized metered fare for the trip (fare, tolls, surcharge, and
tip, if paid by credit or debit card)
      (10)   Method of payment
      (11)   The trip number
      (12)   Other information required by the Commission.
   (b)   Form of Trip Record.
      (1)   Trip Records must be collected and stored electronically, through
the use of the Technology System.
      (2)   If the Technology System is inoperable, a written Trip Record must
be kept during the 48-hour period the Taxicab is permitted to operate after
timely notification of the malfunction. (See 35 RCNY §
58-41)
   (c)   Access to Trip Record.
      (1)   Trip Record information must be available to the Commission and the
Taxicab Driver.
      (2)   Trip Record information must be available at the end of each shift
and/or at the end of a lease term.
      (3)   An Owner must take possession of any written Trip Records weekly.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-22(c)(3)
 
   (d)   Changes and Corrections.
      (1)   An Owner must not knowingly enter false information into the
electronic data system for entry onto the electronic Trip Record.
      (2)   An Owner must not make erasures or obliterate information on a
written Trip Record, or other record that Owner is required to maintain.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-22(d)(2)
 
      (3)   If a wrong entry is made on any written Trip Record, the Driver or
Owner must correct it and record the date, time, and reason for the change, so
long as a record of the manually changed entry exists.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-22(d)(3)
 
      (4)   Trip Records must not be changed either in whole or in part, unless
authorized by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-22(d)(4) 30 days
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 58-23 Records – Contact Information.
   (a)   Mailing and Email Addresses. 
      (1)   Each Owner must designate a Mailing Address; this can be the
Agent's address but cannot be a post office box number.
      (2)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
Mailing Address furnished by the Owner.
      (3)   Each individual Owner must also file and maintain with the
Commission the Owner's personal mailing address, Email address and a telephone
number where the Owner can be reached directly.
      (4)   Each Business Entity Owner must also file and maintain with the
Commission the personal mailing addresses, Email addresses and telephone
numbers of each of Owner's Business Entity Persons.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-23(a)(1)-(4)
 
      (5)   The Commission is not required to send any communication to the
Owner's personal address, except when notifying Owner that the License of the
Agent designated by Owner has been revoked. Other communications sent to the
Owner's personal address are at the discretion of the Commission.
      (6)   An Owner must report any change of mailing or Email address to the
Commission in person or by registered or certified mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-23(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Telephone Number and Immediate Access. An Owner must maintain on file
with the Commission a current telephone number connected to an answering
machine or recording device, a pager number, an answering service telephone
number or a similar means of telephone contact, so that the Commission can
reach the Owner on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-23(b)
 
(Amended City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016)
§ 58-24 Records – Maintenance Requirements.
   (a)   Shift Drivers. An Owner must keep accurate records of the Driver for
each shift.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-24(a)
 
   (b)   Fleet or Minifleet Owner Records. A fleet or minifleet Owner must
maintain for a period of three years a written record of every shift providing
the following information for each Taxicab:
      (1)   Driver's name,
      (2)   TLC Driver License number,
      (3)   State license plate number,
      (4)   Medallion number,
      (5)   Time of leaving garage,
      (6)   Exact time of return.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-24(b)
 
   (c)   All Owners must maintain the following additional records for a period
of three years:
      (1)   Drivers' electronic and written trip records.
      (2)   Receipts and disbursements from the Taxicab operations.
      (3)   Payments to Drivers.
      (4)   Mileage record of each vehicle.
      (5)   Workers' compensation insurance coverage, if any.
      (6)   Liability insurance coverage.
      (7)   Leases entered into pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-21(c).
      (8)   Vehicle purchase agreements entered into pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(4).
      (9)   Any other information required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 for each missing item. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-24(c)(1)-(9)
 
   (d)   An Owner must make available to a Driver any records that the Owner is
required to maintain, and that the Driver can be required to present to the
Commission or any other governmental agency; the Owner can provide photocopies
of the records.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-24(d)
 
(Amended City Record 9/25/2015, eff. 10/25/2015; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 58-25 Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Report Change in Status.
      (1)   When an Owner has a change of Mailing Address or a change in the
office of record, the Owner must personally appear at the Commission to report
the changes within 72 hours of such change (not including weekends and
holidays).
      (2)   The Owner must bring the Rate Cards for all of Owner's Taxicabs.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-25(a)
 
   (b)   Lost, Stolen, or Damaged Taximeter. If a Taximeter is lost, stolen or
damaged beyond repair, the Owner must notify the Commission and the Police
Department within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) of the loss,
theft or destruction, and must provide any affidavit or information that the
Commission requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-25(b)
 
   (c)   Annual Financial Reporting Requirements. 
      (1)   Any natural person who is a Medallion Owner or affiliated with a
Business Entity (including a director, shareholder, officer, member or partner)
that possesses any interest in a Medallion must provide annually to the
Commission, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commission, a statement
together with such supporting documentation as may be prescribed by the
Commission, that includes but is not limited to the following:
         (i)   Each TLC license in which the Medallion Owner or Business Entity
Person possesses an interest,
         (ii)   Gross income and expenses related to the operation of the
Medallion
         (iii)   Total paid liability insurance premiums for the Medallion
         (iv)   Balances of all loans secured by a Medallion in which the
Medallion Owner or Business Entity Person possesses an interest,
         (v)   Number of Medallions in which the Medallion Owner or Business
Entity Person possesses an interest that serve as collateral for a secured
loan,
         (vi)   Number of Medallions in which the Medallion Owner or Business
Entity Person possesses an interest that do not serve as collateral for a
secured loan, and
         (vii)   Any other interest such Medallion Owner or Business Entity
Person has in any taxicab, livery, or for-hire vehicle business, whether or not
such business is licensed by the Commission.
      (2)   All prescribed statements and supporting documentation must be
submitted to the Commission on or before the 15th of June of each year.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-25(c)(2)
 
(Amended City Record 10/6/2022, eff. 11/5/2022)
§ 58-26 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Metered Rate of Fare.
      (1)   Metered Rate of Fare. The rate of fare for Taxicabs is as follows,
regardless of the number of passengers or stops:
         (i)   The charge for the initial unit is $3.00 plus the Taxicab
Improvement Surcharge of $1.00.
         (ii)   The charge for each additional unit is $.70.
         (iii)   The unit of fare is:
            A.   One-fifth of a mile, when the Taxicab is traveling at 12 miles
an hour or more; or
            B.   60 seconds when the Taxicab is traveling at less than 12 miles
an hour.
         (iv)   The Taximeter must combine fractional measures of distance and
time in accruing a unit of fare. Any combination of distance or time specified
in paragraph (iii) above must be computed by the Taximeter in accordance with
Handbook 44 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
         (v)   The fare must include pre-assessment of the unit currently being
accrued; the amount due can therefore include a full unit charge for a final,
fractional unit.
      (2)   Surcharges. In addition to the metered rate of fare, Taxicabs will
add the following surcharges, except where surcharges are specifically
exempted:
         (i)   A rush hour surcharge of $2.50 for all trips beginning on a
weekday after 4:00 p.m. and before 8:00 p.m.; this surcharge will not be
applied on legal holidays.
         (ii)   A nighttime surcharge of $1.00 for all trips beginning after 8:
00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
         (iii)   A surcharge of $5.00 for all trips to and from LaGuardia
Airport.
      (3)   MTA Tax. The MTA Tax must be charged on any trip that starts in New
York City and ends in any of the following:
         (i)   New York City
         (ii)   Dutchess County
         (iii)   Nassau County
         (iv)   Orange County
         (v)   Putnam County
         (vi)   Rockland County
         (vii)   Suffolk County
         (viii)   Westchester County
   (b)   Flat Rates between Manhattan and Kennedy Airport. 
      (1)   Flat Fare Rate between Manhattan and Kennedy Airport. The fare for
a trip between Kennedy Airport and Manhattan will be a Flat Rate of $70.00,
plus any tolls and applicable surcharges.
         (i)   A rush hour surcharge of $5.00 will be added to this Flat Rate
for all trips beginning on a weekday after 4:00 p.m. and before 8:00 p.m. This
surcharge will not be applied on legal holidays.
         (ii)   The MTA Tax must be charged in addition to the Flat Rate.
         (iii)   The Taximeter must reflect that this trip is a Flat Rate fare.
      (2)   Calculating Fare for Multiple Stops to Manhattan. If passengers
request multiple stops on a trip from Kennedy Airport to Manhattan, the fare
will be determined as follows:
         (i)   The first stop in Manhattan is paid as required by paragraph (1)
of this subdivision.
         (ii)   The Taximeter is then turned on as if for a new trip and a new
fare is calculated as a regular metered trip.
         (iii)   The total metered fare (plus any surcharge) is paid at the
last stop by the remaining passenger.
         (iv)   No fare is due at the time any other passengers are dropped off
between the first and last passenger.
         (v)   Example: if three passengers request stops at 42nd St., 18th St.
and 4th St.:
            A.   $70.00 plus the MTA Tax and any applicable tolls or surcharges
will be collected at 42nd St.
            B.   The Taximeter will be turned on at that point.
            C.   When the second passenger exits at 18th St., the Taximeter
remains on and no money is paid to the Driver.
            D.   The passenger dropped off at 4th St. must pay the fare on the
Taximeter.
      (3)   Metered Fare to Boroughs Other Than Manhattan. All trips between
Kennedy Airport and a borough other than Manhattan are governed by the metered
rate of fare as set forth in 35 RCNY §
58-26(a).
      (4)   Chairperson's Right to Suspend this Provision. The Chairperson is
authorized to suspend the enforcement of this provision at any time, if in the
judgment of the Chairperson such a suspension is necessary to preserve adequate
levels of service to and from Kennedy Airport.
   (c)   Trips Beyond the City. 
      (1)   For a trip beyond the limits of the City of New York, except for
Westchester or Nassau County, or Newark Airport, the fare will be a Flat Rate.
The MTA Tax must be added to the Flat Rate for any trip that starts in New York
City and ends in any of the following:
         (i)   Dutchess County
         (ii)   Orange County
         (iii)   Putnam County
         (iv)   Rockland County
         (v)   Suffolk County.
      (2)   For a trip to Westchester or Nassau County the fare will be the sum
of the following amounts:
         (i)   The amount shown on the Taximeter for that portion of the trip
that is inside the City limits, plus
         (ii)   Twice the amount shown on the Taximeter for that portion of the
trip that is outside the City limits, plus
         (iii)   All necessary tolls to and from the destination.
         (iv)   The MTA Tax must be added to the total fare.
      (3)   For a trip to Newark Airport the fare will be the sum of the
following amounts:
         (i)   The amount shown on the Taximeter, plus
         (ii)   A surcharge of $20.00, plus
         (iii)   All necessary tolls to and from the destination.
      (4)   Any continuous trip where the point of origin and the destination
are both within the limits of the City of New York will not be considered a
trip beyond the City limits, even though the shortest and most direct route
requires traveling outside the City limits but within continuous counties. The
Taximeter must be kept in the recording position throughout the trip.
   (d)   No Charge for Luggage or Mobility Aids. There will be no charge for:
      (1)   Steamer trunks or other luggage or belongings;
      (2)   Wheelchairs, crutches, three-wheeled motorized scooters and other
mobility aids transported in the interior of the Taxicab;
      (3)   Use of the Taxicab's trunk.
   (e)   Tolls – How Tolls are Paid.
      (1)   All Taxicabs must be equipped with a New York MTA Bridges & Tunnels
EZ-Pass®. (See 35 RCNY §
58-27)
      (2)   When a Taxicab drives through a toll plaza with an EZ-Pass®, the
MTA Bridges & Tunnels automatically deducts the cost of the toll from an
account maintained by the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
      (3)   Passengers must pay for the toll, but are only required to pay the
actual amount (often a discounted toll) charged to the EZ-Pass®.
      (4)   Drivers must collect the proper toll amount from the passenger and
forward it to the holder of the EZ-Pass® tag.
   (f)   Tolls – What Tolls are Paid by Passenger.
      (1)   On all trips within the City of New York, the passenger must pay:
         (i)   All tolls incurred during the trip except for trips as follows:
            A.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge
to Queens.
            B.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Marine Parkway – Gil
Hodges Memorial Bridge to Brooklyn.
            C.   From Staten Island over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to
Brooklyn.
         (ii)   Two times the amount of the toll if incurred during the trip:
            A.   From Queens over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge to the Rockaway
Peninsula.
            B.   From Brooklyn over the Marine Parkway – Gil Hodges Memorial
Bridge to the Rockaway Peninsula.
            C.   From Brooklyn over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to Staten
Island.
      (2)   On trips beyond the City of New York, the passenger must pay all
necessary tolls to and from the destination.
      (3)   A Driver who charges a passenger more than the actual amount of the
EZ-Pass® toll is guilty of an overcharge as prohibited by 35 RCNY §
80-17.
      (4)   A Driver who fails to reimburse an EZ-Pass® tag holder for all toll
charges incurred, including toll charges for which there is no passenger
reimbursement, will be subject to the provisions of 35 RCNY §
80-15(d)(4).
      (5)   In addition to any other penalty permitted, the Commission can
order restitution to a passenger or the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
   (g)   Credit/Debit Card Rules.
      (1)   An Owner who is a merchant is not permitted to charge the Driver a
pass-along or deduction from the total credit/debit charges incurred during the
Driver's shift. An Owner who is a merchant must pay to a Driver all fares paid
by credit card.
      (2)   Merchants are not permitted to charge a pass-along to any passenger
for credit/debit card transactions.
      (3)   An Owner or Agent who or which is collecting the credit card
surcharge authorized by 35 RCNY §
58-21(c)(5)(xi) must ensure that a Driver is not charged any additional credit
card charges, or must reimburse the driver for any such additional charges,
including any credit card charges imposed on the driver by the Technology
System Provider.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-26(g)(3)
 
   (h)   Beginning on January 1, 2015, the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge must
be collected in addition to any fare charged under subdivisions (b) through (d)
of this Section.
   (i)   E-Payments.
      (1)   The payment for the fare for any trip paid for using an E-Payment
must not exceed Commission-approved rates, plus an optional tip.
      (2)   The fare must be calculated as required by these rules and the
Taximeter must be used for all trips, including trips paid for by E-Payment,
unless it is a Flex Fare trip. Any fare paid for by E-Payment must be
calculated by the Taximeter and not by any other method, unless it is a Flex
Fare trip.
      (3)   The itemized fare amount charged to the Passenger must be
automatically transmitted to the E-Hail Application from the Technology System
or the Taximeter, and relevant payment data necessary to obtain a complete trip
record must be transmitted from the E-Hail Application to the Technology
System. Manual input of the fare by the Driver or any other person into the E-
Hail Application is not permitted.
(Amended City Record 9/25/2015, eff. 10/25/2015; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 11/18/2022, eff. 12/18/
2022; amended City Record 10/30/2023, eff. 11/29/2023; amended City Record 8/
22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024)
§ 58-27 Operations – EZ-Pass® Required.
EZ-Pass ® Required.
   (a)   EZ-Pass® Account. All Owners must participate in the EZ-Pass® New York
Program by maintaining a current account with the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority, Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ("MTA Bridges and Tunnels" or
"MTA B&T").
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-27(a)
 
   (b)   EZ-Pass®Tags Required on all Taxicabs.
      (1)   Owners must either:
         (i)   Equip all of Owner's Taxicabs with an MTA Bridges and Tunnels
EZ-Pass® tag, each of which must be attached as required by MTA B&T, or
         (ii)   Allow a Driver to use his or her personal EZ-Pass® tag.
      (2)   Owners must have available at least one MTA Bridges and Tunnels tag
for each of their Medallions.
      (3)   Owners must maintain a sufficient balance in their EZ-Pass®
account, according to what is required by the program.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-27(b)
 
   (c)   Driver Provides EZ-Pass® Tag.
      (1)   A Driver can choose to use his or her own EZ-Pass® tag.
      (2)   If a Driver uses his or her own EZ-Pass®, the Driver keeps the toll
money paid by the passenger, or is reimbursed the amount of the toll(s) if the
passenger pays by credit or debit card.
   (d)   Owner Provides EZ-Pass® Tag.
      (1)   Funds Accrue to Owner. When an Owner provides the EZ-Pass® tag, the
Driver must ensure that all of the monies paid by a passenger for toll(s)
accrue to the Owner.
         (i)   If the customer pays by cash, the Driver will forward the money
to the Owner at the end of his or her shift or at the end of his or her lease.
         (ii)   If the customer pays by credit or debit card, the Owner will
retain any amount paid for toll(s).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-27(d)(1)
 
      (2)   Owner can Require Driver to Maintain a "Replenishment" Account.
         (i)   An Owner who is the EZ-Pass® tag holder can require a Driver who
is Dispatched in one of Owner's Taxicabs for one or more shifts to maintain an
EZ-Pass® replenishment account with the Owner.
         (ii)   The Owner can require a Driver to maintain a maximum of $10 for
every 12-hour shift included within a lease period, up to a maximum of $100, in
the replenishment account for the benefit of Owner.
         (iii)   The Owner can collect from this account any tolls paid by the
Owner's EZ-Pass® account for a tag assigned to a Taxicab operated by the
Driver, for which the Owner has not been reimbursed.
         (iv)   Any funds held in the replenishment account that are not used
to reimburse the Owner must be returned to a Driver within 30 days after the
termination of the Driver's lease with the Owner.
         (v)   An Agent has the same rights and obligations as Owner under this
35 RCNY §
58-27(d)(2).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 plus restitution to the Driver of
58-27(d)(2) any replenishment account improperly retained Appearance REQUIRED
            by an Owner or Agent
 
§ 58-28 Operations – Miscellaneous Requirements.
   (a)   Lost Property – Police Notification. Passenger lost property found in
a Taxicab must be taken without delay to the police precinct in which the
garage is located unless it can be returned to its rightful owner within a
reasonable time.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-28(a)
 
   (b)   Lost Property – Notify the Commission. The Taxicab Owner must promptly
inform the Commission of any property that has been taken to a police precinct
as required by 35 RCNY §
58-28(a).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-28(b)
 
   (c)   No Solicitation.
      (1)   When a Taxicab is operating, Owners must not allow any service or
merchandise to be sold or advertised to any passenger.
      (2)   An Owner must not make any arrangement with an owner, manager or
employee of any restaurant, bar, night club, cabaret, dance hall, hotel, or any
similar place, in which the Driver agrees to solicit or recommend patronage for
such places, without prior written approval of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-28(c)
 
   (d)   No Disruption of Pedestrian or Vehicular Traffic. An Owner must not
Dispatch a Taxicab from a public street or other public area if the Dispatch
will prevent the flow of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, or cause
inconvenience or annoyance to the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-28(d)
 
§ 58-29 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Required Inspections. No new or replacement Taxicab can operate for
hire unless it has been inspected and approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and seizure of the vehicle Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-29(a)
 
   (b)   Tri-Annual Inspection. An Owner must have his Taxicab inspected every
four months at a date and time designated by the Commission and at any other
time deemed necessary by the Commission. The License of an Owner whose Taxicab
is not timely inspected will be summarily suspended.
 
            Fine: (penalties below are cumulative)

            0 - 30 days past inspection due date:
            $100 and Suspension until compliance

35 RCNY §  31 - 60 days past inspection due date:
58-29(b)    $100 - $250 and Suspension until compliance  Appearance REQUIRED

            61 - 120 days past inspection due date:
            $250 - $500 and Suspension until compliance

            More than 120 days past inspection due date:
            $500 and/or revocation.
 
   (c)   Components of Taxicab Inspections. A Taxicab inspection consists of
(1) inspection to verify compliance with the inspection items required by
Section 301 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, (2) visual
inspection of the interior and exterior of the Taxicab to verify compliance
with these Rules, and (3) inspection to verify compliance with any other
applicable laws, rules and requirements. If a Taxicab fails any component of
the inspection, it must be reinspected until it passes all components of the
inspection.
§ 58-30 Vehicle Condition – Meet Safety Standards.
   (a)   While a taxicab is in operation, all equipment, including brakes,
tires, lights and signals must be in good working order and meet all
requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, and the Rules of
the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
58-30(a)    hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (b)   An Owner must comply with all notices and directives to correct
defects in Taxicabs.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 and suspension until the defective Appearance N/A
58-30(b)    condition is corrected.
 
   (c)   An Owner must repair or replace a Taxicab when the Commission
determines that the vehicle is unsafe or unfit for use as a Taxicab and directs
the Owner to remove it from service. The Owner must surrender the Medallion and
Rate Card to the Commission for storage and the License will be summarily
suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance N/A
58-30(c)    Suspension until compliance
 
§ 58-31 Vehicle Condition – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Clean. The Taxicab's exterior and interior must be clean.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-31(a)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Trunk. The trunk compartment must be capable of securely holding
passengers' baggage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-31(b)
 
   (c)   Shoulder Belts.
      (1)   Every Taxicab must be equipped with shoulder belts for both outside
front seat positions and both outside rear seat positions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(c)(1)
 
      (2)   All seat belts and shoulder belts must be clearly visible,
accessible and in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(c)(2)
 
   (d)   No Alterations. An Owner will make no structural change in a Taxicab
that deviates from the Taxicab specifications set forth in 35 RCNY
Chapter 67 without the Commission's written approval.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-31(d)
 
   (e)   No Physical Movement of Medallion. An Owner must not affix, remove or
transfer a Medallion to a new or replacement vehicle without prior
authorization of the Commission, except that an Owner can affix additional
bolts to a Medallion in order to further secure it.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(e)    days
 
   (f)   Medallion Number on Roof Light. The Medallion number on the front and
rear of the Roof Light must be clean and unobstructed so that the Medallion
number is plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-31(f)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (g)   Illumination. When a Taxicab is in operation for hire after sunset,
the following items must be illuminated so that they are clearly visible from
the rear seat:
      (1)   The face of the Taximeter.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-31(g)(1)
 
      (2)   The TLC Driver License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(g)(2)
 
      (3)   The Rate Card.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(g)(3)
 
   (h)   Lighting Control. The dashboard dimmer switch or any other device must
not control the candlepower of the Roof Light, Taximeter light, card frame
light or interior lighting.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-31(h)    days
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/12/2020,
eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 58-32 Vehicle – Markings & Advertising.
   (a)   Approved Exterior Markings.
      (1)   An Owner of a Taxicab must apply to the exterior of the Taxicab
markings approved by the Commission.
      (2)   An Owner of a Taxicab must obtain the approved Taxicab markings
from a person or entity authorized by the Commission to print and distribute
the decals. A depiction of the decals and a list of persons authorized to print
and distribute the decals will be available on the Commission's website and/or
through other means determined by the Commission and announced on its website.
      (3)   Authorized Stand-by vehicles must display SBV number decals in lieu
of the Medallion number decals.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-32(a)(1)-(3)
 
   (b)   Approved Emblems.
      (1)   An Owner must not display emblems on the Taxicab exterior, other
than an emblem identifying:
         (i)   The Owner
         (ii)   An association of Owners
         (iii)   A Taxicab Drivers' union
         (iv)   The Taxicab manufacturer
      (2)   These emblems must conform to the Marking Specifications for
Taxicabs and will be subject to the approval of the Commission.
      (3)   No more than two of the same emblem can be displayed on a Taxicab,
unless otherwise authorized by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-32(b)(1)-(3)
 
   (c)   Other Approved Markings. An Owner must not display any lettering,
emblem, advertising or marking of any kind on the exterior of a Taxicab,
including windows and exterior accessories, unless authorized by the
Commission, except for the following:
      (1)   Markings, inscriptions and/or advertising specifically permitted or
authorized by the Commission.
      (2)   Advertising that is authorized by the Commission on the Vehicle's
Rate Card and for which the Owner has obtained a permit from the Commission
      (3)   Accessible Taxicab Insignia.
         (i)   The design for insignia that will identify the vehicle as an
Accessible Taxicab will be provided by the Commission on its website or through
other means presented on its website.
         (ii)   These insignia must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars
of a sedan or an SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both
sides of the accessible Taxicab, and will be visible to passengers entering the
accessible Taxicab.
      (4)   Clean Air Taxicab Insignia.
         (i)   The design for insignia that will identify the vehicle as a
Clean Air Vehicle will be provided by the Commission on its website or though
other means presented on its website.
         (ii)   These insignia must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars
of a sedan or an SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both
sides of such Taxicab, and will be visible to passengers entering the clean air
Taxicab.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-32(c)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (d)   Maintain in Good Condition. Required inscriptions and markings must be
maintained in good condition.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-32(d)
 
   (e)   Commercial Use Tax Stamp. An Owner must affix a current New York City
commercial use motor vehicle tax stamp to the lower right side of the Taxicab
windshield so as to be plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-32(e)
 
   (f)   Approved Interior Markings. An Owner must not display inside a Taxicab
any advertising or other notice not specifically authorized by these rules or
the Commission's Marking Specifications for Taxicabs unless approved by the
Commission, except for the following:
      (1)   Industry signage/logos of all credit/debit cards accepted by the
Technology System, all of equal size.
      (2)   Advertising on the Technology System as set forth below in the
Taxicab Marking Specifications table (35 RCNY §
58-32(i)) and in 35 RCNY §
67-15(d).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-32(f)(2)
 
      (3)   Cyclist Awareness Decal. An Owner must equip all Taxicabs with
decals provided by the Commission warning passengers to look for cyclists
before opening the door. Such decals must be placed on the inside of both rear
passenger doors.
 
            Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
35 RCNY §  $75 if found guilty following a hearing. No Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-32(f)(3) penalty for missing decal if condition is
            corrected within 10 days
 
   (g)   Braille and Raised Lettering Plaques. An Owner must equip all Taxicabs
with both of the following:
      (1)   A Taxicab Identification Braille Plaque.
         (i)   This plaque must be made of .040 gauge aluminum with a matte
finish and measure 3 1/4 inches in length and 1 3/4 inches in height, with
radius corners.
         (ii)   The plaque must state, in Raster Braille grade two:
            A.   The Medallion number centered on the first line,
            B.   The word "COMPLAINTS" centered on the second line, and
            C.   The telephone number "212 NYC TAXI" centered on the third
line.
         (iii)   The plaque must be permanently affixed on the door armrest of
the horizontal plane of the right rear door, or another location approved by
the Chairperson.
      (2)   A Taxicab Identification Raised Lettering Plaque.
         (i)   This plaque must be made of 1/8-inch thick black acrylic plastic
and measure 11 inches in length and five inches in height, with radius corners
and four holes (one in each corner) for attachment with screws.
         (ii)   The plaque must state, in one inch high white Helvetica
lettering that is permanently affixed:
            A.   The Medallion number centered on the first line,
            B.   The word "COMPLAINTS" centered on the second line, and
            C.   The telephone number "212 NYC TAXI" centered on the third line
with appropriate spacing between the three words.
         (iii)   The plaque must be permanently affixed on the rear of the
front right passenger seat or partition, not more than six inches below the
lexan or polycarbonate portion of the partition.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100. No penalty for missing plaque, if   Appearance N/A
58-32(g)(2) condition is corrected within forty-eight hours
 
   (h)   Special Markings for Clean Air Vehicles. Owners of a Clean Air Taxicab
must display on the Taxicab's Personal Information Monitor information provided
by the Commission that accomplishes the following:
      (1)   Identifies the Taxicab as a Clean Air Vehicle
      (2)   Includes the address of the Commission web page(s)
      (3)   Includes, to the extent practicable:
         (i)   Estimated air quality benefits associated with the use of the
vehicle, and
         (ii)   The type of fuel used to power the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
58-32(h)
 
   (i)   Marking Specifications for Taxicabs. 
INSCRIPTION* LOCATION SIZE
INSCRIPTION*              LOCATION                   SIZE
(a) Rate of fare decals                              
[Reserved]
                          Both front doors centered
                          left to right and located
                          in the upper half of the
(b) Taxicab logo decals   flat surface between the   The size of the Taxicab
(required) (Non-          bottom edge of the door    logo decals must be
detachable type only.)    and the door handle.       determined by the
                          The base line of the       Commission
                          Taxicab logo decal must be
                          parallel to the bottom
                          door edge.
(c) Medallion number      Front and rear of roof     2 3/4" to 3" high letters
(required)                light.                     1/2" thick.
(d) "Owner-Driver"        Rear of taxi.              3" maximum height
(optional)
(e) EMBLEMS (Optional)    On rear baggage
(1) Fleet Owner           compartment in lower right
(2) Owner Association     corner of deck lid.        2" high letters 1/4"
(3) Taxicab Drivers'      Consult the Commission if  thick. Avoid overcrowding
Union insignia            contour of lid requires
(4) Taxicab manufacturer  another location on the
                          lid.
(f) Medallion number,     On the back of the front
interior (required). Can  seat.
be one-piece decal or a   The top of the number must Numbers and letter must be
stencil. The number must  be located not more than   3" minimum in height.
be of a color contrasting two inches below the top
with the seat, to provide of the front seat.
for easy legibility.
                          On the back of the front
                          seat or on a safety
                          partition, displayed in a
                          manner that is clearly
(g) Passenger Information visible to the passengers
Sign. (required) Must     in the back seat.
contain the information   If the taxi is equipped    Approximately 12" wide by
required by the Chairman  with a safety partition,   6" high.
or his designee.          the passenger information
                          sign can be placed on the
                          partition behind the
                          Driver's head, but no
                          higher than a headrest
                          would be.
(h) "Drivers Wanted"
sign. Can include the     Rear of taxi.              No more than 24" wide by
telephone number of the                              3" high.
Owner. (Optional)
(i) "If this taxi is
parked for over 24 hours, Rear of taxi or horizontal No more than 24" wide by
please call Owner at      on dashboard.              3" high.
(telephone number) . . ."
(Optional)
(j) Telephone available,  Exterior, on a door or a
or similar language or    side window.               4" by 6", or smaller.
symbol (optional)
(k) Brand name Technology On the bezel of the        Not to exceed 1 1/4" in
Service Provider          Technology System          height and 4" in length
(l) "This vehicle is
equipped with camera                                 Letters must be at least
security. YOU WILL BE     On rear passenger window   one-half inch high.
PHOTOGRAPHED." (Non-
detachable decals only)
                          The decals must be applied
                          to both rear quarter
                          panels, just below the
                          rear windows or following
(m) Medallion number      the line created by the    The size of the Medallion
decals (required). (Non-  bottom edge of the         number decals must be
detachable decals only.)  windows.                   determined by the
                          On some vehicles, such as  Commission.
                          minivans, the Medallion
                          number can be placed at
                          the rear of the sliding
                          door.
(n) New York State symbol Front and rear of roof
for accessibility, for    light, displayed on both    
Accessible Taxicabs.      sides of the medallion
(optional)                number.
(o) "Drivers are not
allowed to use cell       Interior of passenger
phones or handheld        compartment in a location  As issued by the
electronics." Decal or    plainly visible to         Commission
sticker shall be issued   passengers
by the Commission
(p) "Turning? People are  On the inside of the front
Crossing." The sticker    windshield, in the center
must be obtained pursuant and adjacent to the top of
to instructions posted on the windshield directly
the Commission's website  behind the rearview        3.5" wide by 2.5" high.
or through other          mirror, placed in such a
appropriate means         manner not to obstruct the
announced on the website. driver's view.
(required)
(q) "The choices you make
behind the wheel matter."
The sticker may be
obtained pursuant to
instructions posted on    On the rear bumper of the  15" wide by 4" high.
the Commission's website  vehicle.
or through other
appropriate means
announced on the website.
(optional)
(r) "ATTENTION:
Assaulting A Driver Is    In Taxicabs with a
Punishable By Up to       partition, the sticker
Twenty-Five Years in      will be placed above the
Prison." The sticker must braille plaque on the
be obtained pursuant to   partition. In Taxicabs     8.0 x 2.0 inches.
instructions posted on    without a partition, the
the Commission website or sticker will be placed in
through other appropriate a frame on the passenger
means announced on its    seat headrest.
website. (required)
(s) "Taxi and Limousine
Drivers Are Protected By
New York State Law
ATTENTION: Assaulting a
driver is punishable by
up to twenty-five years   On a rear passenger
in prison." The sticker   window.                    3.5 x 3.5 inches.
may be obtained pursuant
to instructions posted on
the Commission website or
through other appropriate
means announced on its
website. (optional)
(t) The decal will
feature the International
Symbol of Access for
Hearing Loss, described
as the profile of an ear  Vehicles equipped with
with a wide diagonal line Hearing Induction Loop     The exterior B-pillar
running from the bottom   technology must place the  decal will be 3.000 x
left to the top right.    decal on the outside of    3.000 inches; the interior
The symbol contrast shall the vehicle as directed by passenger compartment
be light on dark or dark  the Chairperson, and       decal dimensions will be
on light. A "T" will be   inside the rear passenger  as issued by the
placed in the lower       compartment in a location  Commission.
right-hand corner of each plainly visible to
decal. The internal decal passengers.
will include the language
"Induction loop
installed. Switch hearing
aid to T-coil."
(u) Cyclist Awareness     Inside of both rear        As issued by the
Decals (required)         passenger doors            Commission
 
* Detachable signs suspended from door frames are not permitted.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020; amended City Record 9/25/2025, eff. 10/25/
2025)
§ 58-33 Vehicles – Items Required in Vehicle.
   (a)   The following must be present in the Taxicab while it is in operation
for hire:
      (1)   The Rate Card, in the Driver's License frame.
      (2)   An insurance card or photocopy, unless the Owner is self insured
and has noted this fact on the Rate Card along with any other information
required by the Commission.
      (3)   All other notices required to be posted in the Taxicab.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $25 for each not in vehicle, not Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-33(a)(1)-(3) to exceed $75 in the aggregate
 
      (4)   A means of collecting and recording all of the Trip Sheet data.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 58-34 Vehicle Equipment.
   (a)   Roof Light. A roof light is required on all Taxicabs, as required by
the Hack-Up specifications in Chapter 67; the Taxicab Owner must ensure
compliance with the following:
      (1)   Controlled by Taximeter. The Taxicab Roof Light must be
automatically controlled by the operation of the Taximeter so that it is
lighted only when the Taximeter is in an off position and unlighted when the
Taximeter is in a recording position. An Owner must not tamper with the
operation of the Taxicab's Roof Light.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-34(a)(1) days
 
   (b)   Air Conditioning. Each Taxicab must be equipped with an operable air
conditioning system; when the vehicle is also equipped with a partition, the
air conditioning system must be able to provide cool air to the rear passenger
area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance REQUIRED
58-34(b)
 
   (c)   Trouble Lights. An Owner must ensure that all Taxicabs bearing such
Owner's Medallion(s) are equipped with a help or distress signaling light
system meeting the requirements of 35 RCNY §
67-11.
 
            Fine: $175 and suspension until the
35 RCNY §  condition is corrected. Respondent must     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-34(c)    provide a condition corrected form issued
            by the TLC's Safety and Emissions Division.
 
   (d)   Optional Rooftop Advertising Fixture. 
      (1)   An Owner may equip a Taxicab with an authorized Rooftop Advertising
Fixture in accordance with 35 RCNY §
67-16.
      (2)   The Owner must remove a Rooftop Advertising Fixture if the TLC
terminates such authorization in accordance with 35 RCNY §
67-16(e).
      (3)   An Owner must not use any rooftop advertising fixture unless the
Owner has obtained a permit to use such a fixture
      (4)   An Owner can use only an authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-34(d)(1)-(4)
 
      (5)   An Owner shall be prohibited from installing any advertising
material if a Vehicle Owner reasonably objects to the express or implied
content of such material. A Vehicle Owner may, but cannot be compelled to,
waive this right to object by providing an Owner a blanket prior written
consent to all advertising material. If such Vehicle Owner does not waive this
right, and there is a dispute with respect to such advertising, Owner and
Vehicle Owner shall name a third party who shall decide any such dispute. If
the Owner and Vehicle Owner cannot agree on who shall decide the dispute they
may obtain the assistance of any alternate dispute resolution service with
offices in the City of New York, the cost of which service will be equally
shared by the Owner and the Vehicle Owner. The definition of Vehicle Owner for
this paragraph includes the title owner of the Taxicab vehicle, or the long-
term lessee of the Taxicab vehicle where the vehicle lease has a conditional
purchase agreement for the vehicle.
 
            Fine: $150 for every thirty days the
            advertising material is posted on the
35 RCNY §  taxicab, if plead guilty before a hearing;  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-34(d)(5) $200 for every thirty days the advertising
            material is posted on the taxicab, if found
            guilty following a hearing.
 
   (e)   Operable Rear Windows. An Owner must equip all Taxicabs with an
operable rear window that meets the requirements of 35 RCNY §
67-08(c).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-34(e)
 
   (f)   E-Hail Application Devices. 
      (1)   A Taxicab may be equipped with or the Driver may utilize a device
with an E-Hail Application installed. A Driver's use of an E-Hail Application
is subject to the requirements of subdivision 35 RCNY §
80-14(g) except that a Driver may accept an E-Hail request with a single touch
using pre-programmed buttons or using voice activation while the vehicle is in
motion. Use of such device by a Driver is optional and an Owner cannot require
a Driver to use an E-Hail Application. A Driver may use no more than one
electronic device with an E-Hail Application, separate from the Technology
System and/or a device provided for the Accessible Dispatch program.
      (2)   An Owner must not permit a Taxicab to be equipped with a device
that allows a Driver to accept payment electronically other than:
         (i)   the Technology System, or
         (ii)   A device with a licensed E-Hail Application installed, which
may only be used to process payment through the licensed E-Hail Application.
      (3)   The installation or mounting of any device with an E-Hail
Application installed is subject to Commission approval. The installation or
mounting of such device must not obstruct the Driver's view of the road, or the
Driver or Passenger's view of the Taximeter.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a
58-34(f)    hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (g)   Dispatch equipment. An Accessible Taxicab is required to have Dispatch
Equipment installed in the Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/15/
2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended
City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-35 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions.
   (a)   Partition Required.
      (1)   A Taxicab must be equipped with a partition unless exempt from this
requirement.
      (2)   An Owner must ensure that all Taxicabs, except as provided in
subdivision (b) of this section, are equipped with a partition that meets the
specifications set forth in 35 RCNY §
67-10, and with provision for air conditioning for the rear passenger
compartment, as set forth in
35 RCNY § 67-14.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and suspension until the condition Appearance REQUIRED
58-35(a)    is corrected
 
   (b)   Exemption from Partition Requirement. A Taxicab Owner will be exempt
from the provisions of subdivision (a) of this section provided the Taxicab is
equipped with the following:
      (1)   The required Trouble Lights.
      (2)   A cellular telephone with an emergency dialing feature.
      (3)   An approved In-Vehicle Camera System that meets the requirements of
35 RCNY §
67-12.
   (c)   Repealed. 
(Amended City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016; amended City Record 2/12/2020,
eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 58-36 Vehicle Equipment – In Vehicle Camera System (IVCS).
   (a)   When an existing in-vehicle camera system is required to be replaced
or when the system is installed, the Taxicab must be equipped with an IVCS that
meets the specification of 35 RCNY §
67-12; the system must be installed and maintained by the manufacturer's
authorized installer or a Taximeter Business that meets the requirements of 35
RCNY §
67-12; and the IVCS must be functioning and maintained in good working order.
 
            Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a hearing
            and supply a condition corrected form
35 RCNY §  issued by TLC's Safety and Emissions        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-36(a)    Division; $450 if found guilty following a
            hearing. Suspension until the condition is
            corrected.
 
   (b)   Each Taxicab equipped with an IVCS must be equipped with a cellular
telephone as set forth in subdivision (b) of this section.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-36(b)
 
   (c)   Each Taxicab equipped with an IVCS must display decals on each rear
passenger window, visible to the outside, that contain the following
information: "This vehicle is equipped with camera security. YOU WILL BE
PHOTOGRAPHED."
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-36(c)
 
   (d)   IVCS. An Owner must not delete, modify, or alter in any way image, or
video footage of the IVCS.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-36(d)    day suspension.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 58-37 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeters.
   (a)   Taximeter Requirements. An Owner must equip the Taxicab with a
Taximeter subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The Taximeter must be of a make and type acceptable to the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-37(a)(1)
 
      (2)   The Taximeter's fare indicating mechanism must be affixed to the
vehicle's dashboard so that it is clearly readable and visible to all
passengers in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-37(a)(2)
 
      (3)   The Taximeter's serial number or software version number must be
the same as that shown on the Rate Card assigned to the Taxicab; or entered on
the Rate Card by a Licensed Taximeter shop.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-37(a)(3)
 
      (4)   The Taxicab tire size must be the same as that for which the
Taximeter is calibrated, as indicated by the Rate Card.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-37(a)(4)
 
      (5)   All Taximeter seals must be installed by a Licensed Taximeter
repair shop or agent of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
58-37(a)(5)
 
      (6)   The wiring harness leading from the Taximeter to the speed sensor
must have no unapproved intervening connectors, splices, "Y" connections, or
direct or indirect interruptions or connections of any kind whatsoever.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
58-37(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Repealed. 
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-38 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeter Defects.
   (a)   No Defects in Taximeter or Installation. A Taxicab must not be in
service for hire with a defective Taximeter or a Taximeter that has been
improperly installed.
   (b)   Repair or Replace Defective Taximeter. Whenever a Taximeter or its
installation is defective or whenever a Taximeter computes an inaccurate rate
of fare, the Owner must have the Taximeter:
      (1)   Repaired, tested and certified at a licensed Taximeter Business, or
      (2)   Replaced by the Taximeter Business with an approved Taximeter that
has been inspected, tested and sealed;
   (c)   Assembly Must be Certified. After repair or replacement of the
Taximeter, the Taximeter/vehicle assembly must be tested and certified in
compliance with Commission regulations.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-38(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Repairs by Licensed Agent. No adjusted, repaired or recalibrated
Taximeter or appurtenance of a Taximeter can be installed in a Taxicab unless
the adjustment, repair or recalibration was done at a licensed Taximeter repair
shop or other authorized facility; the Owner is responsible for any
installation that violates this rule.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-38(d)
 
§ 58-39 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeter Tampering.
   (a)   Unauthorized Tampering. Unless authorized by the Commission, no person
will tamper with, alter, repair or attempt to repair any portion of the
Taximeter system that would affect the operation of the Taximeter or the
Technology System, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The Taximeter
      (2)   The Technology System
      (3)   Any seal affixed to the Taxicab by a licensed Taximeter repair shop
or other authorized facility
      (4)   Any cable connection, cable system electrical wiring, or wireless
connections
      (5)   The vehicle's mechanism or its tires.
   (b)   Owner's Responsibility. The Owner is responsible for any tampering,
alteration or any unauthorized repair or attempt to repair.
 
               Fine: $250 - 1,500 and/or suspension up to 30
35 RCNY §     days. suspension until compliance under to 35 Appearance N/A
58-39(a) & (b) RCNY §
               68-16
 
   (c)   Owner's Defense. It will be an affirmative defense to a violation of
this section that the Owner:
      (1)   Did not know of or participate in the alleged tampering of the
Taximeter or Technology System; and
      (2)   Exercised due diligence to ensure that tampering with the Taximeter
or Technology System does not occur. Examples of an Owner's due diligence
include, but are not limited to:
         (i)   Clearly warning Drivers that if they violate the Taximeter or
Technology System tampering rules, Owner will:
            A.   Immediately terminate any lease agreement Owner has with the
Driver; and
            B.   Report the tampering violation to the Commission, which will
result in the probable revocation of their TLC Driver License;
         (ii)   Including the warning against violating the Taximeter and
Technology System tampering rules as a provision in any written lease
agreement;
         (iii)   Stamping the warning against violating the Taximeter and
Technology System tampering rules on any written Trip Records whenever paper
Trip Records must be issued to one or more Taxicab Drivers;
         (iv)   Conducting periodic random comparisons of the odometer and the
Taximeter mileage readings of a Taxicab to check for any inappropriate
disparities;
         (v)   Conducting periodic random inspections of the Taximeter and the
Technology System in all the Owner's Taxicabs to detect any evidence of
tampering; and
         (vi)   Having all of the Owner's Taxicabs inspected by a licensed
Taximeter shop once every inspection cycle.
   (d)   Notify the Commission of Tampered, Unauthorized or Removed Taximeter.
An Owner must notify the Commission by telephone immediately, and in writing
within 24 hours, upon discovering any of the following:
      (1)   Any Taximeter other than the Taximeter approved by the Commission
(as indicated on the Rate Card) has been installed in the Owner's Taxicab;
      (2)   Any Taximeter seal in the Owner's Taxicab has been removed or
tampered with;
      (3)   Any unauthorized device has been connected to any Taximeter, any
seal, cable connection or electrical wiring, in the Owner's Taxicab, which can
affect the operation of the Taximeter;
      (4)   Any intervening connections, splices, "Y" connections or direct or
indirect interruptions or connections of any kind whatsoever have been
discovered on any wiring harness attached to the Taximeter in the Owner's
Taxicab.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $500 - $1,000 and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
58-39(d) (1)-(4) to 60 days or revocation
 
   (e)   Inspections by Authorized Person.
      (1)   A Taxicab's Taximeter must be tested for accuracy over a measured
mile course and its installation must be tested for compliance with the rules
of the Commission.
      (2)   Only personnel authorized by the Commission can perform these
tests.
      (3)   These two inspections must be completed and the results of the
tests indicated on the Rate Card in each of the following circumstances:
         (i)   At least once every 12 months.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
58-39(e)(3)(i) hearing; $200 if found guilty following Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               a hearing.
 
         (ii)   Whenever a Taximeter is installed in a vehicle or a Taximeter's
metrological system is updated.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-39(e)(3)(ii)
 
         (iii)   When the transmission or differential is altered, repaired or
replaced.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-39(e)(3)(iii)
 
         (iv)   When a change is made in any other part of the Taxicab that can
affect the Taximeter reading.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-39(e)(3)(iv)
 
         (v)   At any other time required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-39(e)(3)(v)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 58-40 Vehicle Equipment – Technology System Installation.
   (a)   Required Installation. Owners must ensure that all of their Taxicabs
are equipped with a Technology System provided by a licensed Technology System
Provider, and otherwise meet the requirements of these provisions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-40(a)
 
   (b)   E-Hail Application. Any licensed E-Hail Application that provides for
E-Payment used in a Taxicab must integrate with the Technology System or
Taximeter. Owner must not allow any E-Hail Application to be used to process
payment that is not a licensed E-Hail Application.  
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a
58-40(b)    hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 58-41 Vehicle Equipment – Technology System Operation.
   (a)   Good Working Order. Owners must ensure that the Technology System
equipment is constantly maintained and is in good working order.
 
            Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a hearing
            and supply a condition corrected form
35 RCNY §  issued by TLC's Safety and Emissions        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-41(a)    Division; $200 if found guilty following a
            hearing. Suspension until the condition is
            corrected.
 
   (b)   Failure to Operate. 
      (1)   If the Technology System malfunctions or fails to operate, an
incident report must be filed with the licensed Technology System Provider
within two hours following the discovery of the malfunction.
      (2)   If the Driver or Owner's Agent filed the incident report, the Owner
will not be required to file a separate incident report but must verify the
filing by obtaining the incident report number.
      (3)   The Owner or Owner's Agent must meet the appointment for repair
scheduled by the Technology System Provider following the incident report.
   (c)   48-Hour Repair Deadline. A Taxicab in which any material feature of
the Technology System is not functioning must not operate more than 48 hours
following the timely filing of an incident report.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
58-41(c)
 
   (d)   Repealed. 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 58-42 Vehicles – Use of Stand-by Vehicles (SBV).
   (a)   Who Can Use. Only a Fleet can maintain and use Stand-By Vehicles.
   (b)   When Used. A Stand-by Vehicle can be used in place of a currently
Licensed Taxicab only in the following circumstances and for the length of time
indicated below:
      (1)   When the currently Licensed Taxicab is out of service for repairs
or for required inspection, until the repairs or inspection have been completed
      (2)   When a Vehicle has been stolen, for no more than 30 days after the
date stolen
      (3)   When a vehicle has been permanently retired from service, for no
more than 30 days from the date of retirement.
   (c)   Maximum Number of Stand-By Vehicles. A Fleet can maintain Stand-by
Vehicles equal to 10% of the total number of current Medallion Taxicabs owned
or operated by the Fleet.
   (d)   Medallion to be Transferred to Stand-By Vehicle. When a Stand-by
Vehicle is Dispatched, the Medallion and Medallion number in the Roof light of
the out-of-service Taxicab must be transferred to the Stand-by Vehicle.
   (e)   Required in the Stand-By Vehicle. A Stand-by Vehicle must not be
Dispatched unless the SBV transfer form and the SBV Rate Card are present in
the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - 350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
58-42(a)-(e) days.
 
§ 58-43 Medallion Transfers – Overview.
   (a)   Applicability of the "Medallion Transfer" Sections.
      (1)   The "Medallion Transfers" sections of this Chapter, along with
"Licensing" 35 RCNY §
58-04 and 35 RCNY §
58-05, establish the rules for all Transfers of a Taxicab Medallions between/
among private parties, either by:
         (i)   Purchase
         (ii)   Gift
         (iii)   Bequest, or
         (iv)   Operation of law.
      (2)   These provisions do not apply to the sale or resale of Medallions
by the Commission, as described in 35 RCNY
Chapter 65.
      (3)   Except where the provisions specifically reference Secured Lenders,
these provisions do not apply to Secured Lender Recipients.
   (b)   Overview of Requirements to Complete and Effect Transfer. The transfer
of an interest in a Taxicab Medallion will be complete and effective upon all
of the following:
      (1)   Commission Approval. Commission approval of the Transferee's
application
      (2)   Proper Appearances. All persons described in 35 RCNY §
58-44(a) below must appear before the Commission.
      (3)   Transfer Tax Payment. A Transferee of a Taxicab Medallion must
satisfy his or her transfer tax liability as determined by the NYC Department
of Finance, prior to or at the time of transfer.
      (4)   Fulfillment of the Licensing Requirements. The parties to the
transfer must fulfill the Licensing requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
58-04 and 35 RCNY §
58-05.
      (5)   Fulfillment of Tort Liability Requirements. The parties to the
transfer must fulfill the Tort Claim liability requirements set forth in 35
RCNY §
58-47, below.
      (6)   Fulfillment of the Medallion Clearance Requirements. The parties to
the transfer must fulfill the applicable Medallion Clearance Requirements set
forth in 35 RCNY §
58-46 below.
      (7)   Medallion Put into Service. Each Transferee, as well as any
Administrator seeking to operate a Medallion under 35 RCNY §
58-48 below, must place the Medallion in service with a Hacked-up Taxicab
vehicle within seven days of approval of the approval of the application.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-43(b)(7)
 
   (c)   Comply with Transfer Provisions.
      (1)   No person or entity is permitted to attempt to transfer or
participate in the transfer of an interest in any Taxicab Medallion without
fulfilling the requirements of subdivision (b) above, as applicable.
      (2)   The mere act of submitting a transfer application to the
Chairperson will not be considered as a violation of this subdivision.
 
            Fine: $10,000 per entity, per Medallion and
            attempted transfer invalid, applicable to
35 RCNY §  any person or persons (transferor,          Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-43(c)    transferee or both) whose actions
            constituted a violation;
            Revocation may be ordered.
 
§ 58-44 Medallion Transfers – Special Requirements.
   (a)   Personal Appearance.
      (1)   All Transferees or Administrator applicants seeking to operate a
transferred Medallion must appear in person as directed by the Chairperson.
      (2)   If the Transferee applicant is a Business Entity, the following
Business Entity Persons must appear in person before the Commission:
         (i)   All individual shareholders of a corporate entity
         (ii)   All general partners of a partnership entity
         (iii)   All members of a Limited Liability Company.
      (3)   Exception to Personal Appearance Requirement. A power of attorney
can appear and represent any Applicant or Business Entity Person of a Business
Entity Applicant who:
         (i)   Holds an existing, continuing License from the Commission, and
         (ii)   Has an electronic fingerprint record on file with the
Commission, made not earlier than one year prior to the date of the transfer.
   (b)   Transfers During and After Pending Judgment.
      (1)   No voluntary transfer or sale of an interest in a Taxicab License
can be made if a judgment docketed with the clerk of court of any county within
the City of New York remains unsatisfied against the Licensee and in favor of
any state, federal or New York City government agency unless:
         (i)   A bond is filed in an amount sufficient to satisfy the judgment,
         (ii)   All the judgment creditors of a Licensee file written
permission for the transfer, or
         (iii)   The proceeds from the transfer are paid into court or held in
escrow, on terms and conditions approved by the Commission, to protect the
rights of all parties that can have a legitimate interest.
      (2)   An Owner's interest a Taxicab License can be transferred
involuntarily and disposed of by public or private sale in the same manner as
personal property. In that event:
         (i)   Owner's License will be immediately cancelled,
         (ii)   A new License will be issued to the new owner when the Transfer
is properly approved and the transfer is effective, and
         (iii)   If the transfer is by reason of a tort judgment against the
involuntary Transferor, no bond need be provided with respect to that judgment.
   (c)   Voluntary Transfer During Revocation Proceedings.
      (1)   The Owner must not transfer his Taxicab License after the
commencement of revocation proceedings without the written permission of the
Chairperson.
      (2)   The Chairperson can also require that no relative of the Medallion
Owner or any other person or entity affiliated with the Owner receive the
Taxicab License.
      (3)   The Chairperson can also require an escrow be held in an amount to
be determined by the Chairperson after an approved closing in order to satisfy
any fines subsequently levied against the Owner.
   (d)   Preserve Medallion Category.
      (1)   A transfer of an Independent Medallion will be made only to an
approved individual or Business Entity that does not own any interest in any
other Medallion; similarly, the transfer of a Minifleet Medallion will be made
only to a Transferee approved to own and operate a Fleet or Minifleet.
      (2)   An Independent Medallion Owner must not have a financial interest
in any other Taxicab.
      (3)   A Minifleet Medallion Owner must not have a financial interest in
any Independent Medallion Taxicab.
      (4)   For the purpose of this subdivision (d), "financial interest" will
mean an ownership interest or an interest received as a pledge or security or
subject to a security agreement to secure financing.
   (e)   Additional Requirements for Transfers Made by Conditional Sales
Agreements. Where an interest in a Medallion is acquired through a conditional
sales agreement, the following requirements apply:
      (1)   The parties must provide the Commission with a disclosure statement
indicating the terms of the agreement.
      (2)   The seller must remain liable for any fines or penalties imposed
against the Taxicab License for violations occurring during the term of the
agreement, unless they are paid by the purchaser.
      (3)   The seller must notify the Commission in writing if the seller
repossesses the Taxicab within 72 hours of the sale (exclusive of weekends and
holidays).
      (4)   The parties to a conditional sales agreement are subject to the
Lease Cap provisions in 35 RCNY §
58-21.
      (5)   No conditional transfer shall be effective until the parties have
completed all the requirements for transfer required by this Chapter.
§ 58-45 Medallion Transfers – Application Documentation and Requirements.
   (a)   Application. An Applicant/Transferee must file a completed application
in the form prescribed by the Chairperson.
   (b)   Payment of Fees. An Applicant/Transferee must pay the following fees:
      (1)   A transfer fee of Fifty Dollars ($50).
      (2)   An administrative charge of $160.
      (3)   The licensing and inspection fees required under 35 RCNY §
58-07.
   (c)   Proof of Identity. An individual Transferee and all Business Entity
Persons of a Business Entity Transferee must:
      (1)   Provide proof of identity in the form specified in 35 RCNY §
58-04(a), and
      (2)   Disclose any trade name under which the Transferee intends to
operate.
   (d)   Owner-Must-Drive Proof. If the Transferee is acquiring an interest in
a Medallion from an Independent Taxicab Owner, Transferee must provide the
Valid License number of the person who will fulfill the service requirements of
the Owner-Must-Drive Rule in 35 RCNY §
58-05(d).
   (e)   Proof of Vehicle Ownership. Transferee must provide proof that
Transferee has or will have an appropriate vehicle, by providing either:
         (i)   A bill of sale of a vehicle eligible to be used as a Taxicab
(see 35 RCNY
Chapter 67, Taxicab Hack-Up), or
         (ii)   An affidavit specifying that the Transferee will have a vehicle
to be used as a Taxicab within the seven days following the effective date of
the transfer (see 35 RCNY §
58-43(b)(7), above).
   (f)   Payment of Fines and Fees. An Applicant/Transferee must provide proof
of payment of any outstanding fines or fees owed to the Commission, the Parking
Violations Bureau (or their successors) by the Transferee or any Business
Entity Persons of a Business Entity Transferee.
   (g)   Source of Funds.
      (1)   An Applicant/Transferee must provide documentation in a form
satisfactory to the Chairperson detailing the sources of the funds, if any,
Transferee is using to purchase the Medallion, including:
         (i)   Copies of bank account passbooks or bank statements;
         (ii)   Affidavit explaining cash sums and deposits over $10,000 paid
to or by the Transferee within six months prior to the date of submission of
this documentation;
         (iii)   Affidavits from donors of any gifts;
         (iv)   Statements from secured and/or unsecured lenders detailing
amounts lent, security if any, and terms of payment; and
         (v)   Copies of IRS Form 8300 filed by any Broker in connection with
funds received in the context of the transaction.
      (2)   If the transfer is by gift or is for less than Market Value, the
Transferee must produce a waiver letter from the NYC Department of Finance
along with any documentation referred to in the waiver.
   (h)   Additional Documents Required from Corporate Transferee Applicants.
Any corporate Applicant/Transferee or any Applicant seeking to purchase an
interest in a corporation must provide, for that corporation:
      (1)   All newly formed corporations must include a copy of the
certificate of incorporation and the filing receipt of the certificate of
incorporation.
      (2)   Established corporations can include the documents described in (i)
above alternatively, they can include a certified copy of the certificate of
incorporation.
      (3)   All corporations must include a copy of the resolution or action by
the incorporators, shareholders or directors electing officers of the
corporation.
      (4)   All corporations must include a list of stockholders, with the
number of shares owned by each.
   (i)   Additional Documents Required for Partnerships. Any partnership
Transferee Applicant or any Applicant seeking to purchase an interest in a
partnership must provide for that partnership:
      (1)   A copy of the certificate of partnership
      (2)   A list of the partners, including the percentage owned by each.
   (j)   Additional Documents Required for Limited Liability Companies. Any LLC
Transferee Applicant or any Applicant seeking to purchase an interest in an LLC
must provide for that LLC:
      (1)   A copy of the articles of organization
      (2)   A copy of the operating agreement
      (3)   A list of the members, with the percentage owned by each.
   (k)   Additional Document Required from a Foreign Business Entity. Any
Business Entity not organized under the laws of the State of New York must also
provide proof of authorization to operate in New York.
   (l)   Documents Required from a Secured Lender Recipient. If the transfer is
the result of a foreclosure or similar action by a creditor, the following
documents must be provided:
      (1)   A hypothecation agreement, stock pledge or stock pledge agreement
if the transfer is occurring by transfer of, or foreclosure upon, stock;
      (2)   A UCC Article 9 Foreclosure "Affidavit of Disbursements" showing
that all claims have been satisfied or will be satisfied or acceptable
documentation regarding any claims not satisfied;
      (3)   Copies of UCC-1 filings (including file stamp or file number) filed
against the former Owner or Owner's interest in the Medallion;
      (4)   Copies of all security agreements involved in the transfer in
respect of the lenders' interests in the Medallion;
      (5)   A bill of sale, if any, or proof of other transfer in connection
with any security agreement;
      (6)   If the Medallion was sold in an auction, proof of advertisement of
the auction together with the attendance sheet;
      (7)   If the Medallion was sold outright, a copy of the Notice of Sale.
   (m)   Affidavits Required by the Commission. Transferees must provide:
      (1)   An affidavit or affirmation under penalty of perjury, in a form
approved by the Chairperson, that the Applicant does not rely upon the actions
or determination of the Commission with respect to the Medallion; and
      (2)   Any other affidavit or affirmation regarding documentation required
by the Chairperson.
   (n)   Lien Searches. An Applicant/Transferee must submit with the
application:
      (1)   Copies of a NYS UCC lien search of the Transferor/Owner,
      (2)   Copies of a lawsuit and judgment search for all counties in which
the transferor has been domiciled for the shorter of (i) five years, or (ii)
length of time the transferor has owned the Medallion being transferred,
      (3)   Copies of all active records found in the search, and
      (4)   An affidavit or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, from the
Applicant/Transferee and the transferor warranting that:
         (i)   They have reviewed and are familiar with the contents of all of
the searches
         (ii)   All disclosed liens and judgments will be:
            A.   Satisfied prior to or from the proceeds of the transfer
            B.   Included in the escrow amount, or
            C.   Assumed by the Applicant.
   (o)   Tort Letters to Establish Escrow Amount. The application of any
Transferee subject to the Tort Liabilities rules in 35 RCNY §
58-47 below (and except as excused in 35 RCNY §
58-47(d)) must include all of the following:
      (1)   All Tort Letters from the transferor's insurer(s) during the
shorter of
         (i)   Six years, or
         (ii)   The length of time the transferor has owned the Medallion up to
and including the date the Medallion is put into storage or the date prior to
the effective date of transfer.
      (2)   Any documentation that may be required regarding any potential
Excess Claims that the Tort Letters may disclose.
      (3)   Any information held by the Applicant/Transferee or transferor
regarding any potential Excess Claims.
      (4)   Any other information held by the Applicant/Transferee or
Transferor that might be necessary to determine the Escrow Amount.
   (p)   Transferring the Technology System. The application must include the
following information regarding the Technology System:
      (1)   Proof of Notice to the Technology System Provider. 
         (i)   The Transferor must provide proof that notice of the transfer
has been sent to the Technology System Provider that holds the contract to
provide the Technology System for the Medallion being transferred.
         (ii)   The notice must be:
            A.   Sent at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of transfer
(NOTE: The Technology System Provider can waive the 30-day requirement by
signing the form)
            B.   Sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
            C.   Sent to the address specified in the contract
         (iii)   Proof of notice will be:
            A.   A copy of the Notice
            B.   A copy of the certified mail receipt, and
            C.   An affidavit or affirmation under penalty of perjury verifying
the mailing
      (2)   Transferor's Statement of Intent. The Transferor must use a form
approved by the Chairperson to:
         (i)   Provide a statement of Transferor's intent to
            A.   Cancel the contract with the Technology System Provider or
            B.   Assign the contract to the Transferee.
         (ii)   Provide a statement of Transferor's intent to:
            A.   Return the Technology System to the Technology System
Provider,
            B.   Retain the Technology System, or
            C.   Transfer the Technology System to the Transferee.
      (3)   Transferee's Statement of Intent. The Transferee must use a form
approved by the Chairperson to provide a statement of Transferee's intent to:
         (i)   Assume the Transferor's contract with the Technology System
Provider, or
         (ii)   Identify the licensed Technology System Provider which the
Transferee intends to use to provide the Technology System.
   (q)   Other Documentation. The Applicant must provide any other
documentation required by the Chairperson in order to assist in the Chairman in
determining whether the proposed Transferee meets the criteria for licensing
and ownership of a Taxicab Medallion.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 58-46 Medallion Transfers – Transferor Must Clear the Medallion.
   (a)   Place in Storage. Before a Medallion can be transferred, it must be
placed in storage for at least seven days not counting the day it is put in
storage or the day the clearance is given. (Exception: A Medallion owned by a
corporation or LLC need not be placed in storage if the transfer is to be
accomplished by a transfer of stock or membership interests in the company.)
   (b)   Clear All Open Items. All open items against the Medallion Owner/
Transferor (including any Business Entity Person of the Owner) must be cleared,
including but not limited to summons issued by the Commission, outstanding
fines and penalties owed to the Commission or the Parking Violations Bureau (or
their successors), incomplete License renewal requirements, and violations
against the TLC Driver License.
   (c)   Requirements of Secured Lenders. Any secured lender that obtains
possession of a Medallion through foreclosure, repossession or in any similar
manner, must place the Medallion in storage with the Chairperson.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 58-47 Medallion Transfers – Tort Claims.
   (a)   Applicability.
      (1)   This 35 RCNY §
58-47 applies:
         (i)   To all Transferees other than Administrators and Legatees.
         (ii)   To all Transferors other than an Administrator/operator making
a distribution to a Legatee.
      (2)   This 35 RCNY §
58-47 does not apply to Secured Lender Recipients.
   (b)   Provisions for Satisfaction of Tort Liabilities.
      (1)   The parties to any applicable transfer must prove that provisions
have been made to satisfy all outstanding tort claims against the Transferor of
the Taxicab Medallion.
      (2)   This can be accomplished either by:
         (i)   Posting a bond with the Chairperson to cover all outstanding
tort liabilities; or
         (ii)   Establishing an escrow account in the Escrow Amount (not
exceeding the Maximum Escrow Amount), determined as described in subdivision
(c) below.
      (3)   No transfer of the Taxicab Medallion(s) can occur until:
         (i)   The bond is posted
         (ii)   The Escrow Amount is established and the escrow agent has given
an undertaking to the Chairperson to establish and hold the escrow account on
the terms required by this 35 RCNY §
58-47 and to notify the Chairperson within five days after the escrow account
has been established, or
         (iii)   It is determined by the Chairperson that neither a bond nor an
escrow account is required.
      (4)   Secured Lender Recipients must create an escrow account in the
amount of the Secured Lender Escrow Amount.
   (c)   Determining the Amount of the Escrow Account.
      (1)   Identify Potential Claimants. The Transferor must identify the
holders of all potential Excess Claims, by obtaining and reviewing the
following sources of information:
         (i)   All Valid Claim Letters held in Commission files
         (ii)   Prior Claim Letters held in Commission files
         (iii)   Tort Letters
         (iv)   Potential claims revealed through the lien, judgment and
lawsuit searches required under 35 RCNY §
58-45(n), above.
      (2)   Notify Potential Claimants.
         (i)   The Transferor must provide adequate mail notice, as described
in subdivision (3) below, to the holder of each potential Excess Claim. The
notice must state the following:
            A.   Whether the Transferor believes the holder's claim is a
potential Excess Claim and the dollar amount (including $0) that Transferor
proposes to establish for that claimant's claim.
            B.   That the claimant has 30 days from the date of the notice to
object to the amount by sending a written response to the Transferor (with a
copy to the Commission, attention Legal Department Transfer Division); the
response must state the basis for claimant's objection to the proposed Escrow
Amount.
            C.   That if the Commission does not receive the claimant's
objection within the 30 day period, the Commission will consider the claimant
to have accepted the Transferor's proposal regarding the Escrow Amount to be
established for the claim.
            D.   That claimant's acceptance of or failure to object to the
Transferor's proposed Escrow Amount will not affect any rights, claims or
remedies the claimant has directly against the Transferor.
         (ii)   If the Commission does not receive the claimant's objection
within 30 days from the date of the notice, the Commission will consider the
claimant to have accepted the Transferor's proposal regarding the Escrow Amount
to be established for the claim.
      (3)   Adequate Mail Notice to Potential Claimants. Transferor's notice to
potential claimants must be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested,
with a copy also sent by regular mail and a copy sent to the Commission,
attention "Legal Department Transfer Division," as follows:
         (i)   For potential claimants disclosed by the lien, judgment and
lawsuit searches required under 35 RCNY §
58-45(n) above, adequate notice will be considered given if the following steps
are taken:
            A.   Notice is sent to the address for the claimant disclosed by
the search
            B.   If this mailing is returned as non-deliverable, the notice is
sent to any other address for the claimant or claimant's attorney of record
disclosed by the search.
         (ii)   For potential claimants disclosed by a Prior Claim Letter or a
Valid Claim Letter, adequate notice will be considered given if the following
steps are taken:
            A.   Notice is sent to the sender of the letter and
               i.   To the claimant at the address disclosed in the letter, or
               ii.   If no address for the claimant is disclosed, to whatever
address the sender provides in the letter.
            B.   If these mailings are returned as non-deliverable, notice must
be sent to any subsequent address provide for claimant by:
               i.   The sender of the letter, or
               ii.   The recipient of the notice at the subsequent address of a
further address for claimant.
         (iii)   For potential claimants disclosed by a Tort Letter, adequate
notice will be considered given if the following steps are taken, as necessary:
            A.   Notice is sent to the address disclosed in, by or through the
Tort Letter or to any counsel of record disclosed in, by or through the Tort
Letter
            B.   If neither the claimant's address nor counsel of record is
disclosed by the Tort Letter, Transferor must consult with the insurers
providing the Tort Letter to ascertain an address for claimant or for
claimant's counsel of record and notice must be sent to any address provided by
the insurer
            C.   If a recipient of the notice at this address (or any
subsequent recipient who is neither the claimant or claimant's counsel)
provides a subsequent address for claimant or claimant's counsel, notice must
be mailed to all subsequently provided addresses
            D.   If no address can be obtained for the claimant or claimant's
counsel or representative, public notice of the contents of the notice must be
placed in the New York Times and The New York Law Journal as a public notice
for one business day.
         (iv)   The Transferor must provide the Chairperson with proof of all
mailings by providing:
            A.   A copy of the mailing receipts
            B.   An affidavit or affirmation under penalty of perjury verifying
the mailings.
      (4)   Response to Claimant's Objection. If a claimant sends a timely
objection, the Chairperson will refer the matter to OATH to determine the
amount of claimant's claim to be included in the Escrow Amount.
         (i)   OATH's rules of practice will govern the proceedings and OATH
will apply principles of tort law.
         (ii)   For the purposes the this proceeding, the OATH terminology will
apply as follows:
            A.   The claimant will be considered to be the "Petitioner"
            B.   The response sent by claimant objecting to the proposed Escrow
Amount will be considered to be the "Petition"
            C.   Transferor will be considered the "Respondent"
            D.   Transferor's original notice to claimant will be considered to
be the "Answer."
      (5)   Settling the Escrow Amount by Agreement.
         (i)   At any time, the Transferor and claimant can agree on the amount
of the claim to be used in establishing the Escrow Amount for the claim.
         (ii)   If the parties reach an agreement, it must be verified in
writing and signed by both parties with a copy provided to the Chairperson.
      (6)   Finalizing the Escrow Amount. If the parties have not reached
agreement:
         (i)   The Chairperson will make a final determination of the required
Escrow Amount for each claim, as follows:
            A.   Any Escrow Amount determined by OATH will be the Escrow Amount
for that claim;
            B.   When the claimant has not objected, the Chairperson's
determination will be based on the Transferor's proposed Escrow Amount for the
claim;
            C.   If the claimant and the Transferor have come to a written
agreement, the Chairperson's determination will be based on that agreement.
         (ii)   The Chairperson's determination will be a final agency
determination regarding Escrow Amount(s) for the purpose of transferring the
Medallion, but is not and is not intended to determine the actual merits of the
claim(s).
   (d)   When the Escrow Amount Cannot Be Reasonably Determined.
      (1)   If Tort Letters cannot be obtained for all or any part of the
period for which they are required to be provided (see 35 RCNY §
58-45(o) above) the Escrow Amount will be as follows:
         (i)   When a Secured Lender Recipient is foreclosing on a Taxicab
License and the transfer is occurring as a result of that action, the escrow
account will be established in the amount of the Secured Lender Escrow Amount;
         (ii)   For all other applicable Transferors, the escrow account will
be established in the Maximum Escrow Amount.
      (2)   An escrow account created with either a Secured Lender or Maximum
Escrow Amount must be maintained for the shorter of:
         (i)   Six years following the date of transfer, or
         (ii)   As required by subdivision (e) below, provided that all Tort
Letters have been obtained and Transferor has determined the appropriate Escrow
Amount under subdivision (c) above.
   (e)   The Escrow Account When Amount Is Determinable.
      (1)   Creating the Escrow Account.
         (i)   Once the Escrow Amount has been determined, an escrow account in
that amount will be established from the proceeds of the transfer or other
resources of the Transferor and maintained until all claims represented in the
account are satisfied or released, as described subdivision (2) below.
         (ii)   The Escrow Account can be held by either:
            A.   Counsel for the claimant,
            B.   Counsel for the Transferor, or
            C.   Otherwise as the claimant and Transferor agree.
         (iii)   The parties must notify the Chairperson as to who is holding
the account.
      (2)   Releasing Funds from the Escrow Account.
         (i)   Any person or entity seeking a release of funds from the escrow
account must show that the claim is no longer outstanding by providing one of
the following forms of evidence:
            A.   Proof of release of the claim
            B.   Proof of satisfaction of the claim
            C.   Proof of dismissal of the underlying claim
            D.   Agreement of the parties settling the claim
            E.   A court judgment directing payment of all or part of the
Escrow Amount to a party.
         (ii)   If the evidence is a court order, it must be a final order,
fully executed and, if necessary, filed or entered.
         (iii)   No funds will be released from the escrow account without the
prior written approval of the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-47(e)
 
§ 58-48 Medallion Transfers – Special Provisions Regarding Estates and
Incompetency.
   (a)   Notice. Notice of the death or the declaration of incompetency of a
Medallion Owner must be given to the Chairperson promptly upon the occurrence.
A Medallion Owner which is a Business Entity must also give prompt notice upon
the death or the declaration of incompetency of a shareholder, partner, or
member of a Business Entity.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 for failure to notify. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
58-48(a)
 
   (b)   Distribution of Interest in Medallion to Legatee.
      (1)   To A Legatee. When a Medallion(s) or an interest in a company or
corporation that owns a Medallion(s) is distributed from an estate, the Legatee
recipient must qualify as a Transferee under the applicable rules in this
Chapter 58, and must submit the following additional documents to the
Commission:
         (i)   A certified copy of the death certificate of the former Owner
listed with the Commission;
         (ii)   A certified copy of letters testamentary or letters of
administration and for an estate not in New York, a certified copy of ancillary
letters testamentary or letters of administration covering the estate's New
York property, which letters:
            A.   Must have been issued no earlier than six months prior to the
date of submission
            B.   Must be unqualified as to the amount of estate assets that the
Executor is authorized to administer and distribute or, if the amount is
qualified, it must be in excess of the value of the Medallion(s) to be operated
or transferred.
         (iii)   A certified copy of the will, if any.
      (2)   Additional Requirements for Distribution to a Legatee in Trust.
         (i)   An interest in a Medallion Taxicab can only be distributed to a
Trust if the distribution is made to a trust for the benefit of a minor and:
            A.   The ownership interest is in the stock of a corporation, or
            B.   The interest is in membership of an LLC that owns one or more
Medallions.
         (ii)   The ownership interest in the Taxicab Medallion must be
distributed out of the trust within 60 days after the date on which the
beneficiary reaches the age for ownership of a Taxicab Medallion (see 35 RCNY §
58-04(b)).
         (iii)   The beneficiary must apply and be approved as a Transferee
under these Medallion Transfer rules before the transfer will be effective.
         (iv)   Notice must be given to the Chairperson promptly upon the
beneficiary reaching the age for ownership of a Taxicab Medallion.
   (c)   Additional Requirements for Temporary Operation of Medallion Taxicab.
      (1)   If an Owner of an interest in a Taxicab Medallion dies or is
declared incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Medallion can
continue to be operated by an Agent for a period of up to 120 days following
the date of death or declaration of incompetency.
      (2)   If, during the 120-day period, an Administrator is appointed, the
administrator will have 60 days from the date of appointment to apply and be
approved under the applicable Medallion Transfer rules to operate the
Medallion; an Agent can continue to operate the Medallion during this 60-day
period.
      (3)   If the decedent or incompetent Owner was an Independent Medallion
Owner, the Owner-Must-Drive Rule (see 35 RCNY §
58-05(d)) will be waived for the 120-day period as well as during the 60-day
period following the appointment of an Administrator, if the appointment occurs
during the 120-day period; the Owner-Must-Drive rule will apply to an
Administrator who is approved to operate the Taxicab.
      (4)   If no one has been approved by the Commission to operate the
Medallion by the end of the 120-day period, the Medallion must be placed in
storage until an Administrator or new person has qualified to operate the
Medallion.
      (5)   If no Administrator, Legatee or other new owner associated with the
estate has qualified to operate the Medallion by the end of the 180-day period
from the date of the death or declaration of incompetency of the Owner:
         (i)   The interest in the Medallion must be transferred to a
Transferee who has applied and been approved as a Transferee by the Commission.
         (ii)   The Medallion must remain in storage until the transfer is
effective.
 
35 RCNY §  Revocation may be ordered if medallion
58-48(c)    operated beyond, or not transferred by, the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            periods specified.
 
§ 58-50 Accessible Vehicle Conversion.
   (a)   Reserved. 
   (b)   Reserved. 
   (c)   Reserved. 
   (d)   Reserved. 
   (e)   Conversion through Scheduled Retirement: A Taxicab Medallion required
to be placed into service with an Accessible Vehicle under this Section must
continuously be Hacked-up with an Accessible Vehicle for a minimum of four
years.
   (f)   Any Owner of a Taxicab Medallion placed into service with an
Accessible Taxicab pursuant to this section must comply with all requirements
of 35 RCNY
Chapter 53.
   (g)   The TLC will review the Taxicab Improvement Fund annually, by no later
than the end of April, beginning in 2017, to assess the adequacy of the Fund,
the uses of the Fund, and the surcharge funding the Fund receives, and will
produce a report annually with the result of its assessment and recommendations
and analysis. Such recommendations and analysis shall include but not be
limited to the following: (i) whether the current surcharge should be lowered,
raised or kept the same; (ii) a review of possible alternate sources of funding
for the Fund other than the surcharge; and (iii) the costs incurred by Owners
and Drivers that are required to purchase and operate Accessible Vehicles as
opposed to those Owners and Drivers who are not so required. Such report shall
be submitted to the Speaker of the NYC Council and posted on TLC's website upon
completion of the report.
   (h)   [Reserved.]
   (i)   Taxi Improvement Fund Allocations. Owners of Medallions who are
seeking to place an accessible Taxicab into service who have submitted all
required forms and documentation as specified by the Chairperson will receive
allocations from the Taxi Improvement Fund as follows:
      (1)   Owners of Medallions who have placed an Accessible Taxicab into
service will receive:
         (i)   Hack-up Payment. A one-time subsidy payment of at least $20,000,
determined by the Commission and posted on the Commission's website. Such
payment will be the same for all eligible Medallion Owners. Such a payment will
be allocated to a Medallion only if the Accessible Vehicle operating on such
Medallion has not previously received such a payment. This determination will
be based on the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) of the Accessible Vehicle.
         (ii)   Accessible Vehicle Operational Payments. 
            (a)   Hack-up payments - $20,000. For those medallions that receive
a $20,000 hack-up payment, the medallion is eligible for a series of equal
payments adding up to $10,000 over a period of 4 years. The payments will be
made four (4) times per year. Such payments will be the same for all eligible
Medallion Owners under this item.
            (b)   Hack-up payments - $14,000. For those medallions that have
already received a $14,000 hack-up payment, the medallion is eligible for a
series of payments totaling up to $16,000 within 4 years from the medallion’s
hack-up date. The amount of such payments will be $1,000 made four (4) times
per year. In the event that the medallion owner has already received a total of
$30,000, through the combination of the $14,000 hack-up payment and operational
payments prior to 4 years after the hack-up date, operational payments will no
longer be issued. Such payments will be the same for all eligible Medallion
Owners under this item. Payments will be issued provided that the Accessible
Taxicab:
               A.   Meets the vehicle inspection requirements of 35 RCNY §
58-29.
               B.   With the exception of the first payment following initial
Hack-up, has completed a minimum of 750 Passenger trips since the previous
inspection.
               C.   Was logged onto the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher system
through the Dispatch Equipment while in operation during the period since the
previous inspection.
      (2)   Drivers of Accessible Taxicabs will receive periodically, a trip
payment of $10 for each Passenger trip initiated by a passenger that requested
accessible service by contacting a call center run by an approved E-Hail
Application Provider and completed while driving an Accessible Taxicab.
   (j)   Terms of Taxi Improvement Fund Grants. 
      (1)   Medallion Owner Application. 
         (i)   A Medallion Owner must file an application for a grant in the
form and manner specified by the Chairperson and must provide all documentation
required by the Commission. The Medallion Owner is subject to all requirements
of this Chapter regarding representations and information provided to the
Chairperson.
            a.   The application for the grant must be submitted within six
months of the date on which the Accessible Vehicle is Hacked-up.
         (ii)   The Medallion Owner must place the Accessible Vehicle into
service before the payment from the Taxi Improvement Fund will be provided to
the Medallion Owner.
      (2)   No Outstanding Fines or Fees. All open items against the Medallion
Owner must be cleared, including but not limited to summonses issued by the
Commission, outstanding fines and penalties owed to the Commission and
incomplete License renewal requirements.
      (3)   Causes For Denial. The Chairperson may deny a Taxi Improvement Fund
application submitted by an Owner who fails to meet the requirements of these
rules. The Commission will inform the Owner, in writing, of the specific reason
(s) for this denial. In addition to other reasons set forth in this subchapter,
the Chairperson may deny an application for funding if any of the following
occurs:
         (i)   The Medallion Owner has failed to submit all of the required
documentation within 30 days of the initial submission of the Taxi Improvement
Fund application.
         (ii)   The history of the Medallion Owner, including substantiated
complaints of fraudulent activity or criminal convictions, indicates that, in
the judgment of the Chairperson, the application should be denied.
         (iii)   There are material misrepresentations or material errors of
omission in the Taxi Improvement Fund application or accompanying
documentation.
         (iv)   The Owner attempts to conceal the identity of a party having an
interest in the ownership of the Medallion.
      (4)   Additional Consideration of an Application for a Taxi Improvement
Fund Grant. If a review of the application leads the Chairperson to believe
that the Owner-Applicant may not be qualified to receive a Taxi Improvement
Fund grant, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the Owner-
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in denial of the
application of the Taxi Improvement Fund grant.
      (5)   Service Requirements. 
         (i)   The Taxi Improvement Fund allocation will be awarded for a
qualified Accessible Vehicle as defined in 35 RCNY §
67-06(b)(1).
         (ii)   The Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) of the qualified
Accessible Vehicle will be recorded by TLC for the purposes of TIF funding
allocation. The Taxi Improvement Fund allocation will only be available for a
specific VIN on one occasion.
 
35 RCNY §      Suspension until compliance
58-50(j)(5)(ii) Fine: $5,000 AND               Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                Restitution of Hack-up Payment
 
(Amended City Record 10/23/2015, eff. 11/22/2015; amended City Record 5/14/
2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended
City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/
2024; amended City Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024; amended City Record 4/2/
2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 58-51 Medallion Relief Program.
   (a)   Definitions Specific to this Section. 
      (1)   Applicant means a medallion owner that is applying for a Grant,
Supplemental Grant, or Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty.
      (2)   Application means a written request in a form satisfactory to the
TLC, supplemented by all requested supporting documents, made by an Applicant
to the TLC to determine the eligibility of an Applicant for a Grant,
Supplemental Grant, or Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty.
      (3)   Grant means one or more disbursements from the Medallion Relief
Program for purposes of restructuring a medallion loan.
      (4)   Loan Restructure means the new terms agreed to by the Applicant
with their lender for the medallion loan.
      (5)   Program Administrator means the entity selected by the TLC to
receive Applications and distribute Grants, Supplemental Grants, and provide
Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranties.
      (6)   Supplemental Grant means one or more disbursements from the
Medallion Relief Program for purposes of supporting payments on loans
restructured under the Medallion Relief Program.
      (7)   Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty means a guaranty on the
principal balance of Loan Restructure that meets the criteria established in
subdivision (e) of this section provided by the Program Administrator to the
Applicant's lender.
   (b)   Grant Eligibility Criteria. To be eligible for a Grant, an Applicant
must satisfy the following criteria:
      (1)   Applicant must be a Medallion Owner;
      (2)   Applicant must possess an interest in no more than six (6)
medallions;
      (3)   Applicant may not apply for more than one Grant per medallion in
which the applicant has an interest;
      (4)   Only one Applicant may apply for a Grant for any particular
medallion;
      (5)   Applicant must have acquired the interest in the medallion for
which the Applicant seeks a Grant no later than March 9, 2021.
      (6)   Applicant's Application must contain a Loan Restructure that meets
the following minimum standards:
         (i)   Reduce principal owed by at least 40% and a monthly payment
under $2,000, or
         (ii)   Reduce principal owed by at least 30% and a monthly payment
under $1,750, or
         (iii)   Reduce principal owed by at least 20% and a monthly payment
under $1,500.
         (iv)   A Loan Restructure may be submitted with an Application if it
does not meet the above minimum standards if:
            A.   The loan principal is reduced by at least 10%, and
            B.   The Loan Restructure contains other features, as determined by
the Program Administrator, that are favorable to the Applicant, including
extended payment terms, waiver of penalties and/or fees, absence of a
confession of judgement, and other features the Program Administrator deems
appropriate.
   (c)   Supplemental Grant Eligibility Criteria. To be eligible for a
Supplemental Grant, an Applicant must satisfy the following criteria:
      (1)   Applicant must have received a Grant for a Loan Restructure.
      (2)   Applicant must demonstrate a discrete and resolvable economic or
other personal hardship that the Program Administrator determines would
temporarily and substantially hinder the Applicant from making the totality of
the initial payments on the Applicant's Loan Restructure. Examples of such
hardships include but are not limited to:
         (i)   Applicant does not have a Vehicle attached to the Medallion.
         (ii)   Applicant is temporarily unable to drive the Applicant's Taxi.
   (d)   Selection Criteria. Grant and Supplemental Grant funds will be awarded
in order of completed applications received until such time as the funds are
exhausted or TLC's agreement with the Program Administrator terminates.
   (e)   Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty Eligibility Criteria. To be
eligible for Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty, an Applicant must satisfy
the following criteria:
      (1)   Applicant must be eligible to receive a Grant provided in
accordance with subdivision (b) of this section, meeting the criteria
established in paragraphs (1) through (5) of that subdivision; and
      (2)   Applicant's Application must contain a Loan Restructure that meets
the following minimum standards:
         (i)   Remaining principal balance of $170,000 or less,
         (ii)   A fixed interest rate of 7.3% or less,
         (iii)   Fully amortized over no less than 10 years and no more than 25
years,
         (iv)   Does not contain personal guaranties or guaranties other than
the Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty, and
         (v)   Level monthly loan payments do not exceed $1,235.00.
      (3)   Any recipient of a Supplemental Loan Deficiency Guaranty who fails
to make payments in accordance with the Loan Restructure will be prohibited
from acquiring an interest in a medallion for a period of five years from the
date of default.
(Added City Record 10/14/2021, eff. 10/14/2021; amended City Record 3/24/2022,
eff. 4/23/2022; amended City Record 9/29/2022, eff. 9/29/2022; amended City
Record 1/30/2023, eff. 1/30/2023)
Chapter 59: For-Hire Service
Subchapter 59A: For-Hire Vehicle Owners
§ 59A-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures, rules and requirements for obtaining and
maintaining a For-Hire Vehicle License, including:
      (1)   For-Hire Livery Vehicles
      (2)   For-Hire Black Car Vehicles
      (3)   For-Hire Luxury Limousine Vehicles
   (b)   To provide penalties for violations of the rules and requirements for
maintaining a For-Hire Vehicle License.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided, this chapter does not apply to For-Hire
Vehicles that are Street Hail Liveries. The requirements for Street Hail Livery
service are provided in 35 RCNY
Chapter 82.
§ 59A-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 59A-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal For-Hire Vehicle License.
   (b)   Black Car is a Vehicle that affiliates with a Black Car Base or with a
High-Volume For-Hire Service.
   (c)   Black Car Base is a For-Hire Base, excluding a High-Volume For-Hire
Service, that operates as follows:
      (1)   All Black Car Vehicles are dispatched on a pre-arranged basis
      (2)   All Black Car Vehicles are owned by franchisees of the Base or are
members of a cooperative that operates the Base; and
      (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of the Base's business is on a
payment basis other than direct cash payment by a Passenger
   (d)   Driver in this Subchapter means a For-Hire Driver.
   (e)   For-Hire Base (or "Base") is the Commission-licensed business for
dispatching For-Hire Vehicles and the physical location from which For-Hire
Vehicles are dispatched; a For Hire Base can be any of the following:
      (1)   A Black Car Base,
      (2)   A Livery Base (or Base Station),
      (3)   A Luxury Limousine Base,
      (4)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service.
   (f)   For-Hire Driver in this Subchapter means a Driver of a For-Hire
Vehicle.
   (g)   For-Hire Vehicle is a motor Vehicle Licensed by the Commission to
carry Passengers For-Hire in the City, which:
      (1)   Has a seating capacity of 20 or fewer Passengers
      (2)   Has three or more doors
      (3)   Is not a Taxicab, a Commuter Van, or an authorized bus as defined
by NYS law.
   (h)   Issuing Jurisdiction is a county within New York State and covered by
Article 17-B, Section 498 of the New York Vehicle and Traffic Law that issues
its own approval to allow a vehicle within its jurisdiction to contract for
hire and perform pre-arranged pick-ups and drop-offs of one or more Passengers.
   (i)   License in this Subchapter means a License for a For-Hire Vehicle.
   (j)   Livery is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a Livery Base
Station.
   (k)   Livery Base Station ("Base" or "Base Station") is a For-Hire Base that
operates as follows:
      (1)   All Livery Vehicles are dispatched from the Base on a pre-arranged
basis.
      (2)   All Livery Vehicles are designed to carry fewer than six (6)
Passengers.
      (3)   Passengers are charged for service on the basis of a flat rate,
time, mileage, or zones.
   (l)   A Luxury Limousine is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a
Luxury Limousine Base.
   (m)   Luxury Limousine Base is a For-Hire Base that operates as follows:
      (1)   All Luxury Limousines are dispatched from the Base by pre-
arrangement.
      (2)   Luxury Limousine Vehicles have a seating capacity of 20 or fewer
Passengers.
      (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of its business is on a payment
basis other than direct cash payment by a Passenger.
      (4)   Passengers are charged "garage to garage" service on the basis of a
flat rate, time or mileage.
   (n)   Owner or Vehicle Owner in this Subchapter refers to the title owner,
registered owner or lessee of a For-Hire Vehicle. An Owner can be a Business
Entity or a person.
   (o)   Penalty Point is a non-monetary penalty assessed against either a Base
Owner or the Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle if they are convicted of certain
violations in this Subchapter.
   (p)   Qualified Jurisdiction is an Issuing Jurisdiction that meets the
requirements for reciprocity described in § 498 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic
Laws.
   (q)   Qualified Vehicle License (or "QVL") is the license issued by a
Qualified Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's vehicles authorizing them to
provide pre-arranged, for-hire transportation within its jurisdiction.
   (r)   Qualified Driver's License (or "QDL") is a license issued by a
Qualified Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's drivers authorizing them to
operate an authorized vehicle to provide pre-arranged, for-hire transportation
within its jurisdiction.
   (s)   Reciprocity (or Reciprocal Recognition) means that:
      (1)   New York City For-Hire Vehicles and Drivers can do pickups or drop
offs in Qualified Jurisdictions for trips ending or beginning in NYC, and
      (2)   Vehicles and drivers that are licensed to perform for-hire
transportation by a Qualified Jurisdiction can do pickups or drop offs in NYC
for trips ending or beginning in the Qualified Jurisdiction.
   (t)   Vehicle in this Subchapter refers to a For-Hire Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59A-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] Identification.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (c)   [Reserved.] Fingerprinting for Good Moral Character.
   (d)   Designate Drivers as Agents to Receive Service.
      (1)   An Applicant for a For-Hire Vehicle License (and a Licensee) must
designate every Driver who operates one of Owner's Vehicles as an agent for
accepting service of summons or Commission notices to correct defects in the
Vehicle.
         (i)   Delivery of the summons or notice to correct defect(s) to a
Driver will be adequate notice to the Vehicle Owner.
         (ii)   The Commission will send a photocopy of any summons or notice
to correct defect(s) to the Vehicle Owner and the Base Owner of record.
      (2)   An Applicant for a For-Hire Vehicle License (and a Licensee) must
designate every Driver who operates one of Owner's Vehicles as agent for
service of any legal process from the Commission that can be issued against the
Owner.
   (e)   Inspection Required for a New Vehicle License.
      (1)   An Applicant for a new For-Hire Vehicle License (or approval for a
replacement vehicle) must demonstrate that the vehicle was inspected at the
Commission's Safety and Emissions Division within ten days:
         (i)   After being issued T&LC plates by the NYS DMV, or
         (ii)   After the Commission's acceptance of the application for
vehicles registered outside New York State
      (2)   Vehicles must pass inspection within 60 days after the date of the
first scheduled inspection before the new For-Hire Vehicle License will be
issued.
      (3)   The maximum number of inspections allowed in this 60-day period is
four.
      (4)   The maximum limit of four inspections applies whether the Applicant
submits only the original vehicle, or also submits a replacement vehicle.
      (5)   Failure of the original vehicle or any replacement vehicle to pass
an inspection after four tries within the 60-day period will result in denial
of the application.
      (6)   Nature of the Inspection.
         (i)   If the vehicle has accumulated fewer than 500 miles traveled at
the time the vehicle arrives at the Commission's facility for inspection,
irrespective of the vehicle's model year, the inspection will be only a visual
inspection.
         (ii)   Unless exempt under (i), if the vehicle is a year 1996 or later
model:
            A.   The vehicle must pass (i) the vehicle inspection requirements
set forth in Section 301 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law, (ii) a visual
inspection of the interior and exterior of the vehicle to verify compliance
with these Rules, and (iii) inspection to verify compliance with any other
applicable laws, rules and requirements.
            B.   The inspection will count as one of the "tri-annual"
inspections required by 35 RCNY §
59A-26.
         (iii)   Unless exempt under (i), if the vehicle is a year 1995 or
earlier model, or if the vehicle is of any model year and the vehicle's maximum
gross weight (MGW) as recorded on the registration card, is 8,501 pounds or
more:
            A.   The vehicle must pass (i) the vehicle inspection requirements
set forth in Section 301 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law, except that the
inspections will not include emissions testing, (ii) a visual inspection of the
interior and exterior of the vehicle to verify compliance with these Rules, and
(iii) inspection to verify compliance with any other applicable laws, rules and
requirements.
            B.   The inspection will not count as one of the "tri-annual"
inspections required by 35 RCNY §
59A-26.
      (7)   The Commission's fee for a required Commission inspection is $75;
this fee includes the certificate of inspection issued when the vehicle passes
inspection. Inspection fees must be prepaid with each application and renewal
application.
      (8)   Reinspection Fee. A reinspection fee can be required if a vehicle
must be reinspected. There is a reinspection fee only if reinspection is
required because the vehicle failed a component of the inspection required by
Section 301 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law. In that case, the reinspection
fee is the maximum fee allowed by DMV regulation for any component that must be
reinspected. If reinspection is required because the vehicle failed any other
component of the inspection, there is no reinspection fee.
      (9)   If the vehicle was altered after manufacture and seats 10 or more
passengers (including the driver) and is not exempt from inspection by the NYS
Department of Transportation, the vehicle must pass an inspection by the NYS
Department of Transportation. The vehicle must also pass a visual inspection by
the Commission.
   (f)   Inspection Required to Renew a Vehicle License.
      (1)   An Applicant for renewal of a For-Hire Vehicle License must have
the vehicle inspected at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division and
demonstrate that the Vehicle has passed an inspection within 120 days after the
date of the first scheduled inspection.
      (2)   The maximum number of inspections allowed in this 120-day period is
four.
      (3)   The maximum limit of four inspections applies whether the Applicant
submits only the original vehicle, or also submits a replacement vehicle.
      (4)   After the License expiration date, the vehicle must not operate
until it passes inspection and meets all other requirements for Licensure.
      (5)   Failure of the original vehicle or any replacement vehicle to pass
an inspection after four tries within the 120-day period will result in denial
of the renewal application.
         (i)   If an original vehicle fails to pass inspection on four tries
within the 120-day period, the licensee can have a different vehicle inspected
if they so choose. This subsequent vehicle will be subject to the same
inspection requirements outlined in 35 RCNY §
59A-04(f)(1) - (5), above.
      (6)   Nature of the Inspection.
         (i)   If the vehicle is a year 1996 or later model:
            A.   The vehicle must pass (i) the vehicle inspection requirements
set forth in Section 301 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law, (ii) a visual
inspection of the interior and exterior of the vehicle to verify compliance
with these Rules, and (iii) inspection to verify compliance with any other
applicable laws, rules and requirements.
            B.   The inspection will count as one of the "tri-annual"
inspections required by 35 RCNY §
59A-26.
         (ii)   If the vehicle is a year 1995 or earlier model, or if the
vehicle is of any model year and the vehicle's maximum gross weight (MGW) as
recorded on the registration card is 8,501 pounds or more:
            A.   The vehicle must pass (i) the vehicle inspection requirements
set forth in Section 301 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law, except that the
inspections will not include emissions testing, (ii) a visual inspection of the
interior and exterior of the vehicle to verify compliance with these Rules, and
(iii) inspection to verify compliance with any other applicable laws, rules and
requirements.
            B.   The inspection will not count as one of the "tri-annual"
inspections required by 35 RCNY §
59A-26.
      (7)   If the vehicle was altered after manufacture and seats 10 or more
passengers (including the driver) and is not exempt from inspection by the NYS
Department of Transportation, the vehicle must pass an inspection by the NYS
Department of Transportation. The vehicle must also pass a visual inspection by
the Commission.
   (g)   [Reserved.] Vehicle Owner Training.
   (h)   Affiliation Required. All Applicants for a For-Hire Vehicle License
must demonstrate that they are affiliated with an appropriate For-Hire Base.
   (i)   Affiliation with Only One Base. For-Hire Vehicles can only affiliate
with one Base at a time.
   (j)   One License per Vehicle. Only one For-Hire Vehicle License will be
issued and in effect for any vehicle, as indicated by the vehicle
identification number, at any one time.
   (k)   [Reserved.] Special Requirements for Black Car Affiliation.
   (l)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (m)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (n)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (o)   Fit to Hold a License. An Applicant for a For-Hire Vehicle License
must demonstrate that the Applicant is Fit to Hold a License.
   (p)   Registration. An Applicant for a new or renewal For-Hire Vehicle
License must demonstrate that the vehicle has been properly registered. For a
vehicle that has been modified after manufacture, this means the Applicant must
show that the vehicle was properly re-registered with NYS after modification.
   (q)   Operating Authority. An Applicant for a new or renewal For-Hire
Vehicle License must show that the vehicle possesses a current and Valid
operating authority license from NYS and a current and Valid MC300 Vehicle
inspection form if the vehicle is not exempt from NYS DOT inspection and
operating authority requirements and either of the following are true.
      (1)   The vehicle seats 10 or more passengers (including the driver) or
      (2)   The vehicle is a modified vehicle.
   (r)   Exempt Vehicles. An Applicant for a new or renewal For-Hire Vehicle
License for a vehicle which has been modified and IS exempt from NYS Department
of Transportation inspection and operating authority requirements must show an
exemption letter from the NYS Department of Transportation.
   (s)   Warranty. An Applicant for a new For-Hire Vehicle License for a
vehicle which has been modified after manufacture (except in a program
supported by the original vehicle manufacturer) must provide evidence of
warranty from the vehicle modifier that the vehicle will be free from defects
in material and workmanship, including that the chassis and frame will be free
from defects for a period of 3 years or 60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
   (t)   Modifier Insurance Coverage. An Applicant for a new or renewal For-
Hire Vehicle License for a vehicle which has been modified after manufacture
(except in a program supported by the original vehicle manufacturer) must
provide evidence that the modifier maintains a General Liability Insurance
Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
   (u)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax applicable to the Applicant's Vehicle. If
the Applicant has not made payment to the NYS DMV, the Applicant must pay the
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the Commission.
      (2)   An Applicant who has already paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
must provide proof of payment in the form of a copy of the New York State
issued registration receipt, or a receipt from the New York City Department of
Finance.
(Amended City Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 8/12/
2019, eff. 8/12/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 59A-05 Licensing – Reciprocal Recognition with Other Jurisdictions.
   (a)   Eligibility for Reciprocal Recognition. To be eligible for
Reciprocity, a vehicle with a QVL issued by a Qualified Jurisdiction meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   Evidence of a Valid QVL from the Qualified Jurisdiction must be
attached to the vehicle's windshield.
      (2)   The vehicle must be operated by driver with a Valid Chauffeur's
License.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-05(a)(2)
 
      (3)   The vehicle must be operated by a driver who:
         (i)   Has a Valid QDL issued by the Qualified Jurisdiction.
         (ii)   Carries proof of the Valid QDL while operating within New York
City and displays it on request or has it posted within the vehicle.
         (iii)   Meets the requirements of 35 RCNY §
80-21.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-05(a)(3)
 
      (4)   The vehicle must have a Valid state registration, and the
certificate of registration (or a legible copy of it) is in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-05(a)(4)
 
      (5)   The vehicle must contain a Trip Record that:
         (i)   Meets the requirements of 35 RCNY §
59A-19,
         (ii)   Demonstrates that any trip (including travel within New York
City) was established by pre-arrangement, and
         (iii)   Shows that either the origin or final destination of the trip
is outside New York City.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-05(a)(5)
 
      (6)   The vehicle must carry a Valid inspection sticker issued under the
laws of New York State or the state of the vehicle's registration. The sticker
must indicate the date of last inspection or the expiration date of the
inspection.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-05(a)(6)
 
      (7)   The vehicle's Reciprocal Recognition must not have been suspended
for failure to make required repairs within 10 days of failing an inspection.
   (b)   Privileges of Reciprocal Recognition. A vehicle that meets the
requirements of this section for Reciprocity will be allowed, without any
License issued by or any fee paid to the Commission, to do the following:
      (1)   Pick up Passengers in the vehicle's Qualified Jurisdiction for
travel to or through New York City
      (2)   Pick up Passengers in New York City for travel to the vehicle's
Qualified Jurisdiction
      (3)   When transporting Passengers between the jurisdictions (as
described in subdivisions (1) or (2) above), temporarily discharge and pick up
such Passengers within New York City; provided, however, that all the stops
must occur within 24 hours of the initial pick up of the Passengers.
      (4)   Transit through New York City for a trip beginning and ending
outside New York City.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 59A-06 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New License. The term of a new For-Hire Vehicle License is two years.
      (1)   New License Issuance. Beginning February 2023, and every six months
thereafter, the Commission will review the number of For-Hire Vehicle Licenses,
pursuant to § 19-550(b)(2) of the Administrative Code of the City of New York
and determine the number of For-Hire Vehicle Licenses, if any, to issue in the
twelve months following such review and the types of vehicles to which the
Commission will issue such new Licenses. In reviewing the number of Licenses to
issue in the next twelve months, the Commission will review congestion levels,
driver pay, License attrition rates, outer borough service, availability and
demand for battery electric vehicles, availability of battery electric vehicle
charging infrastructure, and any other information it deems relevant to
determine the number of Licenses to issue. The results of such review, and the
number of new For-Hire Vehicle Licenses the Commission will issue, will be
posted on the Commission's website. The Commission will not issue new For-Hire
Vehicle Licenses until such time as it completes its first review of the number
of For-Hire Vehicle Licenses pursuant to this section.
      (2)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subdivision, the
Commission will continue to issue new Licenses to:
         (i)   Wheelchair accessible vehicles, and
         (ii)   Until August 13, 2023, an applicant who possesses a TLC
Driver's License, provides written proof that the applicant entered into a
lease for the use of a licensed for-hire vehicle that contains a conditional
purchase agreement for the vehicle prior to August 14, 2018, and demonstrates
that the term of such lease is no less than two (2) years.
      (3)   New Electric Vehicle License Issuance for individual Drivers. The
Commission may make available individual, non-transferable For-Hire Vehicle
Licenses that are restricted to fully battery electric vehicles, powered only
by electric batteries and not gasoline. Such License may be required to be
registered to a Driver using the Driver's individual name and personal Social
Security number. When such requirement applies, no Driver may apply for more
than one such license or hold additional for-hire vehicle licenses.
         (i)   In order to apply for such restricted electric vehicle license,
a statement of interest must be submitted using an online form prescribed by
the Commission. Applicants who submit a statement of interest will be contacted
by the Commission on a first-come-first-served basis until the number of
submitted statements of interest matches the total number of available
individual, non-transferable licenses.
         (ii)   Applicants will have one hundred and twenty (120) days from the
date they are contacted by the Commission to submit a complete license
application, fulfilling all licensing requirements, including but not limited
to the purchase of an electric vehicle, the submission of proof of insurance,
payment of application fees, and the possession of a valid Driver license.
Additionally, vehicles must pass inspection within 60 days after their first
scheduled inspection.
         (iii)   Any Applicant who is contacted and has not completed all the
requirements of the application will have their application denied. The next
Applicant on the list will be contacted to begin the application process. An
Applicant who has their application denied may submit a new statement of
interest and be added to the bottom of the list.
      (4)   New Electric Vehicle License Issuance for any applicant. The
Commission may make available For-Hire Vehicle Licenses that are restricted to
fully battery electric vehicles, powered only by electric batteries and not
gasoline. Such License may be made available on a first-come-first-served basis
to an Applicant and shall initially be restricted to a maximum of 25 such new
electric vehicle licenses per individual Social Security number or Employer
Identification number. It will be within the Chairperson's discretion after the
initial release of the licenses to increase the maximum number of new electric
vehicle licenses per individual Social Security number or Employer
Identification number, depending upon the interest shown by the public in
applying for such licenses. Applications will be submitted in a form approved
by the Chairperson, and the Commission will post application procedures on its
website at least fifteen calendar days prior to the release of such
applications.
   (b)   Renewal License. The term of a renewal License is two years.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date will not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid after
the License expiration date until the application for renewal is approved by
the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 60 days
after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a late
fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid until the application for renewal is approved by the
Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 60 days after the expiration
date.
   (d)   Early Termination. 
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle License terminates early if it is revoked or
surrendered, or if the vehicle's state license plates are voluntarily
surrendered.
      (2)   A License that has been terminated early cannot be renewed or
reinstated.
   (e)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
   (f)   Livery Base Affiliated Vehicles. For a period of one (1) year, For-
Hire Vehicle owners whose licenses were affiliated with a Livery Base and
expired between March 7, 2020 and September 12, 2022 may apply to renew their
licenses, subject to the following requirements.
      (1)   The For-Hire Vehicle License was affiliated with a Livery Base and
expired starting on March 7, 2020, through September 12, 2022.
      (2)   The For-Hire Vehicle must not transfer affiliation to a High-Volume
For-Hire Service.
      (3)   Applicants renewing Livery Base Affiliated Vehicles are responsible
for fees associated with the current license renewal cycle and any outstanding
fees or fines already owed to the Commission prior to expiration.
      (4)   Applicants shall renew Livery Base Affiliated Vehicles with the
same license restrictions that applied at the time of expiration.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 8/12/2019,
eff. 8/12/2019; amended City Record 6/25/2021, eff. 6/25/2021; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023;
amended City Record 4/15/2025, eff. 4/15/2025)
§ 59A-07 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Vehicle License Fee. The fee for each For-Hire Vehicle License will be
$275 annually.
   (b)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application, if it allows the filing at all.
   (c)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (e)   Vehicle License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge a fee of
$25 for each replacement License or Decal.
   (f)   Vehicle Transfer Fees.
      (1)   A Vehicle Licensee can change the Vehicle's affiliation from one
Base to a different Base after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25
fee.
      (2)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the License from one vehicle to
another after approval by the by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (3)   A Vehicle Licensee can replace the license plates on the Vehicle
after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (4)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the license plates from one vehicle
to another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (5)   A Vehicle Licensee must pay a separate fee for each type of vehicle
transfer. This is true even if the Vehicle Licensee wants to do several types
of vehicle transfer all at one time.
   (g)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   For Licenses Issued on or after June 1, 2012 if Tax NOT paid to NYS
DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800,
to be paid with the application for the license.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (2)   At License Renewal for Licenses Expiring on or After June 1, 2012
if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800
for each renewal License period. The tax must be paid with the renewal
application.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (3)   Interim Payments for licenses expiring on or after June 1, 2012 and
before June 1, 2014 if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV. An interim payment of
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax is due on June 1, 2012 for licenses expiring on or
after June 1, 2012 and before June 1, 2014, provided that the Licensee has not
paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the NYS DMV.
         (i)   The amount of the interim payment is:
If a license expires during: The licensee must make an interim payment of: 
If a license expires during:            The licensee must make an interim
                                        payment of: 
June, July or August 2012               $100
September, October or November 2012     $200
December 2012, January 2013 or February $300
2013
March, April or May 2013                $400
June, July or August 2013               $500
September, October or November 2013     $600
December 2013, January 2014 or February $700
2014
March, April or May 2014                $800
 
      (4)   Refunds.
         (i)   The Commission will not refund any payment of Commercial Motor
Vehicle Tax.
         (ii)   Applications for refunds, including but not limited to refunds
upon transfer, surrender or termination, must be made to the NYC Department of
Finance. The application will be reviewed in accordance with the Administrative
Code and the Rules of the NYC Department of Finance.
(Amended City Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018)
§ 59A-08 Licensing – Causes for Denial or Revocation.
   (a)   Material Misrepresentation.
      (1)   The Commission can deny an application for a License or its renewal
and revoke or suspend any License issued if it finds that an Applicant has made
a material misstatement or misrepresentation on an application for a License or
its renewal.
      (2)   The Commission must send notice and conduct a hearing before
revoking or suspending any License already issued.
   (b)   Non-Compliance with Rules. No For-Hire Vehicle License will be issued
or renewed unless the For-Hire Vehicle is in compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter at the time of the application for issuance or renewal.
   (c)   Non-Use. A For-Hire Vehicle License must be revoked for non-use if:
      (1)   For 60 or more days, the Licensee fails to maintain a Base
affiliation (as required by 35 RCNY §
59A-11(e)) or fails to transfer from a base that has been suspended or
      (2)   For 60 or more days, the Licensee fails to maintain insurance
coverage (as required by 35 RCNY §
59A-12) or
      (3)   For 60 or more days, the License holder fails to comply with the
inspection requirements (as required by 35 RCNY §
59A-26)
   (d)   Prior Revocation.
      (1)   If the Applicant has had a previous For-Hire Vehicle License
revoked, the Chairperson may deny the Applicant's application if the previous
revocation shows that the applicant is not Fit to Hold a License.
      (2)   To determine if a previously revoked For-Hire Vehicle License
("Revoked License") will be attributed to this Applicant, the Commission will
include any Revoked License held by any of the following:
         (i)   All of Applicant's Business Entity Persons, and
         (ii)   Any other entity in which any of Applicant's Business Entity
Persons also serve as a partner, officer or shareholder.
   (e)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 45
days of the date the application is filed. This does not apply to inspections.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
60 days of the expiration date of the prior License. This does not apply to
inspections.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
      (4)   The Applicant must also complete the inspection requirements of 35
RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f) within 60 days of the first scheduled appointment. The
Commission will deny the application of any Applicant which does not complete
the inspection requirements as required.
   (f)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
   (g)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   The Commission will deny an application, including a renewal
application, if the Applicant owes the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax required
under subdivision (c) of 35 RCNY §
59A-14 on any Vehicle subject to the application.
      (2)   Payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision is a condition to issuance of a License,
including a renewal License, and the maintaining of such License.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 59A-09 Licensing – Transfer of License.
   (a)   Transfer of Vehicle License to a New Vehicle.
      (1)   In order to transfer the For-Hire Vehicle License to a new vehicle,
the Owner must file an application to transfer the License within 15 days after
registering the new vehicle with the applicable state DMV.
      (2)   No transfer application will be approved until the Owner presents
the vehicle for inspection by the Commission. (See 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e))
   (b)   Only One License per Vehicle. There can only be one Valid For-Hire
Vehicle License issued for any one Vehicle, as determined by the VIN.
§ 59A-10 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
   (a)   Unauthorized Entries. No unauthorized entry can be made on the For-
Hire Vehicle License or the Decal(s). No entry on the For-Hire Vehicle License
or Decal(s) can be changed or defaced.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 for first violation
59A-10(a)   $500 for second violation in 24 months      Appearance REQUIRED
            Revocation for third violation in 36 months
 
   (b)   Prompt Replacement of Unreadable License. An unreadable For-Hire
Vehicle License or Decal(s) must immediately be surrendered to the Commission
for replacement.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-10(b)
 
   (c)   Prompt Report of Loss of License. In case of the theft, loss, or
destruction of a For-Hire Vehicle License or Decal(s), the Owner must
immediately notify the Commission, provide the Commission with an affidavit or
information as required, and replace the License or Decal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-10(c)
 
   (d)   Prompt Replacement of License Plates. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must
report the replacement of any lost or stolen New York State license plates in
writing to the Commission within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays)
after obtaining new plates.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-10(d)
 
§ 59A-11 Compliance with Laws – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   For-Hire Vehicle License and Commission License Plate.
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must not allow any of Owner's Vehicles to
be dispatched unless:
         (i)   A Vehicle registered in NYS has license plates embossed with the
legend "T & LC".
 
35 RCNY §      Vehicle Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-11(a)(1)(i) Penalty Points: 1
 
         (ii)   A Vehicle registered in a state other than New York has
complied with any applicable license plate requirements.
         (iii)   The vehicle has a Valid For-Hire Vehicle License.
 
                  Vehicle Fine: $500 for the first
35 RCNY §        offense in 12 months; $1,000 for the
59A-11(a)(1)(iii) second and subsequent offenses within Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                  a 12-month period.
                  Penalty Points: 1
 
      (2)   The Commission will post a list of Validly Licensed For-Hire
Vehicles on its Web site.
   (b)   Valid TLC Driver License. 
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must not allow any of its Vehicles to be dispatched
unless its driver possesses a Valid TLC Driver License.
      (2)   The Commission will post on its website a list of Drivers holding
Valid TLC Driver Licenses.
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-11(b)   Penalty Points: 1
 
   (c)   Valid Chauffeur's License Required.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must not allow any of its Vehicles to be dispatched
unless it is being driven by a Driver with a Valid Chauffeur's License.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner is responsible for knowing the status of the state-
issued driver's license for any Driver dispatched in one of Owner's Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-11(c)   Penalty Points: 1
 
   (d)   Validity of For-Hire Vehicle License Requires Valid State
Registration.
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle License will be Valid only while the state
registration of the Vehicle remains Valid. The License of an Owner who operates
a For-Hire Vehicle without valid state registration will be summarily
suspended.
      (2)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must immediately surrender his For-Hire
Vehicle License to the Commission upon the expiration, restriction, suspension,
or revocation of the Vehicle's state registration.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and Suspension until compliance. Appearance REQUIRED
59A-11(d)
 
   (e)   Affiliation with Licensed Base. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner may only
dispatch or permit another person to dispatch Owner's Vehicle if:
      (1)   The Vehicle is affiliated with a Validly Licensed Base;
      (2)   The base dispatching the Vehicle is Validly Licensed, and at least
one of the following conditions is met:
         (i)   The Vehicle is being dispatched from its affiliated Base,
         (ii)   The Vehicle is an Accessible Vehicle affiliated with a For-Hire
Base, or
         (iii)   The dispatching Base informs the customer that the Vehicle is
from another Base by providing the customer with the name and license number of
both the affiliated Base and the dispatching Base (clearly identifying which
Base is the affiliated Base and which Base is the dispatching Base) in all
communications with the customer and any materials or receipts provided to the
customer.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-11(e)
 
   (f)   Surrendering Licenses. If a For-Hire Vehicle Owner license is revoked,
expired or denied:
      (1)   It must be surrendered to the Commission within 10 days after
revocation, expiration or denial.
      (2)   If the vehicle is registered in New York State, the Owner must
surrender the T&LC license plates to the New York State Department of Motor
Vehicles.
   (g)   NYS DOT Authority. A For-Hire Vehicle License for a vehicle which
either
      (1)   seats 10 or more passengers and is NOT exempt from NYS Department
of Transportation operating authority and inspection requirements, OR
      (2)   has been modified after manufacture and is NOT exempt from NYS
Department of Transportation operating authority and inspection requirements
will be Valid only while the NYS Department of Transportation operating
authority required for the Vehicle remains Valid. The License of an Owner who
operates a For-Hire Vehicle without valid NYS Department of Transportation
operating authority will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until Valid NYS DOT operating Appearance REQUIRED
59A-11(g)   authority obtained
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/20/
2017, eff. 1/19/2018; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59A-12 Compliance with Law – Vehicle Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   Maintain Liability Insurance.
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must maintain the required insurance
coverage on all of Owner's Vehicles at all times.
      (2)   When a For-Hire Vehicle Owner receives notice that his or her
liability insurance is to be terminated, Owner must surrender the For-Hire
Vehicle License and Decal(s) to the Commission on or before the termination
date of the insurance.
      (3)   This requirement will not apply if the Owner of the Vehicle
submits, before the termination of the policy, proof of new insurance effective
on the date of termination of the old policy.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(a)   days
 
   (b)   Notification to Commission of Changes in Insurance Coverage. Within
seven days, not including holidays and weekends, a For-Hire Vehicle Owner must
notify the Commission in writing of any change in insurance carrier or
coverage, specifying the name and address of the new and the former insurance
carriers and the number of the policy for each affiliated Vehicle. The Owner
must submit proof of such coverage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(b)
 
   (c)   Coverage Requirements. No Commission-licensed Vehicle can be operated
unless it is covered by policies of insurance approved as to form by the
Commission and issued by companies authorized to do business in this State by
the Superintendent of Insurance.
      (1)   General Coverage for Vehicles with Seating Capacity of Less than
Eight. For the purposes of insurance or other financial security, each Owner of
a For-Hire Vehicle with a seating capacity of less than eight passengers (not
including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in amounts
not less than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $100,000 minimum liability and $300,000 maximum liability for
bodily injury and death, as those terms are described and defined in section
370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law; and
         (iii)   $10,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(c)(1)
 
      (2)   Coverage for Vehicles with Seating Capacity of Eight to Fifteen.
Each Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle with a seating capacity of at least eight but
not more than 15 Passengers (not including the Driver) must maintain coverage
for each Vehicle owned in amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law; and
         (ii)   $1,500,000 minimum liability for bodily injury or death to one
or more persons, and because of injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident, as those terms are described and defined in section 370(1) of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(c)(2)
 
      (3)   Special Coverage for Luxury Limousines with Seating Capacity of
Less than Eight. Each Owner of a Luxury Limousine with a seating capacity of
fewer than eight Passengers must maintain coverage for each Vehicle in an
amount of not less than:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $500,000 per accident where one person is injured; and
         (iii)   $1,000,000 per accident for all persons injured in that
accident.
      (4)   Coverage for For-Hire Vehicles with Seating Capacity of Sixteen or
More. Each Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle with a seating capacity of at least 16
Passengers (not including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle
owned in amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $5,000,000 minimum liability for bodily injury or death to one
or more persons, and because of injury to or destruction of property in any one
accident, as those terms are described and defined in section 370(1) of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(c)(3)
 
      (5)   Policy Coverage Restrictions. Insurance policies covering
Commission-licensed vehicles cannot have any limitations or restrictions on
location or timeframes of coverage. Coverage provided under issued policies
must be for 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, regardless of vehicle use or
purpose.
      (6)   Excess policies may be used to satisfy the Commission’s minimum
coverage requirements with a company authorized to do business in this State by
the Superintendent of Insurance.
      (7)   Policy Information Required. Documentation submitted to the
Commission for each vehicle covered by a policy must contain the vehicle
identification number for each such vehicle, effective and end dates of the
policy, coverage amounts, and Certificates of Liability.
         (i)   Declaration pages are required upon Commission request and must
contain the schedule of covered vehicles and the policy number.
         (ii)   All documentation must be submitted electronically in a form
approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §              Fine: $350 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(c)(5), (6) & (7) compliance
 
   (d)   Report of Collisions to Carrier and the Commission. 
      (1)   Report to Carrier. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must immediately report
in writing to Owner's insurance carrier all Collisions that are required to be
reported to the insurance carrier involving Owner's For-Hire Vehicle(s).
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(d)(1)
 
      (2)   Report to Commission.
         (i)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must immediately report in writing to
the Commission all Collisions that are required to be reported to the
Department of Motor Vehicles (under § 605 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law)
involving Owner's Vehicle(s).
         (ii)   A copy of the report sent to the Department of Motor Vehicles
must also be provided to the Commission within 10 days from the date by which
the Owner is required to file the report with the DMV.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $150 and $25 for each day of violation Appearance REQUIRED
59A-12(d)(2) thereafter and suspension until compliance
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 1/1/2026; amended City Record
9/25/2025, eff. 3/1/2026)
§ 59A-13 Compliance with Law – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery Prohibited.
      (1)   Appearance of Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not offer or
give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or
member of the Commission, or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: Revocation and $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Demand for Gratuity. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any
employee, representative, or member of the Commission or any other public
servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 up to Revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(a)(2)
 
      (3)   Offer of Gift to Airport or Transportation Terminal Staff. A
Licensee must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing of value to a
person or persons employed at any airport or other transportation terminal to
provide ground transportation information services, dispatching service,
security services, traffic and parking control, or baggage handling, whether or
not the person or persons are employed by the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey, LIRR, Metro-North, or any similar entity.
 
35 RCNY §   Vehicle Owner Fine: $250 – 1,00Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(a)(3)
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert
with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - 1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(b)   days or revocation
 
   (c)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform any act where this failure is against the best interests of the public,
although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(c)   days or revocation
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform any act that is against the best interests of the public,
although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance
59A-13(d)   revocation                                             REQUIRED
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(e)   days
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(f)   days or revocation
 
   (g)   Threat or Harm to Service Animal. A Licensee must not distract, harm
or use physical force against or attempt to distract, harm or use physical
force against a Service Animal accompanying a person with a disability.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(g)   days or revocation
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission within 15 calendar days after
any felony conviction of the Licensee, or of any of Licensee's officers or
members.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-13(h)
 
   (i)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement.
      (1)   A Licensee must cooperate with all law enforcement officers and all
authorized representatives of the Commission.
      (2)   Cooperation includes, but is not limited to, responding to a
request for the Licensee's name, License number, and any documents Licensee is
required to have in his or her possession.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(i)
 
   (j)   Cooperation with the Commission. A Licensee must comply with the
following required actions:
      (1)   Answer truthfully all questions and comply as directed with all
communications, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives.
      (2)   Within five business days following a request from the Commission,
produce any Licenses or other documents the Licensee is required to have.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-13(j)(1)&(2)
 
      (3)   Within 48 hours, a Licensee must respond to any contact from the
Commission, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-13(j)(3)
 
   (k)   Courtesy. A Licensee will be courteous to Passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-13(k)
 
   (l)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-13(l)
 
   (m)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must not retaliate against any Driver for
making a good faith complaint against any Owner.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first violation and a
59A-13(m)   fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second violation within five
            years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 59A-14 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Alcohol and Drug Laws. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must not knowingly
allow an affiliated For-Hire Vehicle to be operated by a Driver who is under
the influence of any drugs or alcohol or whose driving ability is in any way
impaired.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59A-14(a)
 
   (b)   Payment of all Fines and Judgments. The holder of a For-Hire Vehicle
License issued under this Chapter must satisfy any outstanding judgment and pay
any civil penalty owed for a violation relating to traffic in a Qualified
Jurisdiction or for a violation of the regulations of a Qualified Jurisdiction.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Suspension until satisfaction or Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-14(b)   payment
 
   (c)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Owner must pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax due as described
in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision on an Owner's Vehicle as and when
required by the Commission in these Rules.
      (2)   An Owner must pay the amounts required in subdivision (g) of
Section 35 RCNY §
59A-07, including interim payments, if any.
      (3)   An Owner must also pay any additional Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
amount for any tax year or period which the New York City Department of Finance
has notified the Commission is due and unpaid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-14(c)
 
§ 59A-15 Operations – Base Station Business Premises.
[Reserved.]
§ 59A-16 Operations – Management Oversight (Use of Agents).
[Reserved.]
§ 59A-17 Operations – Service Requirements (Customers).
   (a)   No Required Ride-Sharing. An Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle must not
require that any prospective Passenger share a ride with another prospective
Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-17(a)
 
§ 59A-18 Operation – Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   "Restricted Area". For the purposes of this subdivision, "restricted
area" is defined as all public streets and sidewalks located on either side of
the street on which the Vehicle's affiliated Base is located or within the city
block front where the Base is located, including both sides of the street on
which the Base is located.
   (b)   Obey Traffic Rules in Restricted Area. The Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle
must make sure that the Driver and Vehicle will obey all applicable traffic and
parking regulations within the "restricted area".
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Owner Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-18(b)
 
   (c)   Obey Noise, Littering and General Nuisance Laws. The Owner of a For-
Hire Vehicle must make sure that the Driver and the Vehicle will not create a
nuisance while stopped at the Base, such as engaging in horn honking,
littering, or playing loud audio material within the "restricted area".
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Owner Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-18(c)
 
   (d)   Business Requirements – Nondiscrimination. No Owner of a For-Hire
Vehicle may discriminate against or impose any negative consequences on a
Driver based on whether or not the Driver chooses to operate a For-Hire Vehicle
with an Interior Advertising System, or based on the brand or affiliation of
the Interior Advertising System. Negative consequences and/or discrimination
include but are not limited to: refusing to lease a For-Hire Vehicle to a
Driver, imposing an additional charge for leasing a For-Hire Vehicle without an
Approved Electronic Tablet, reducing the compensation provided to the Driver,
either directly or indirectly through manipulating the number or type of rides
assigned to the Driver, or disciplinary action.
 
            Penalty:
35 RCNY §  First Violation: $1,000 fine              Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-18(d)   Second Violation: $1000 and/or Suspension
            for up to 30 days
 
(Amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59A-19 Operations – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Record-Keeping with Issuing Jurisdictions. Both of the following
entities must ensure the requirements set forth in subdivision (b) below are
met:
      (1)   The holder of a For-Hire Vehicle License issued by the Commission
for a Vehicle used in for hire transportation between New York City and an
Issuing Jurisdiction
      (2)   The holder of an Issuing Jurisdiction Vehicle License issued by a
Qualified Jurisdiction for a vehicle used in For-Hire transportation between
New York City and the Qualified Jurisdiction
   (b)   Issuing Jurisdiction's Trip Record. The entities identified in (a)
above must ensure that a record is made of each trip between New York City and
the Issuing Jurisdiction. This record must contain:
      (1)   A record is made prior to the commencement of the trip in the Trip
Record carried in the vehicle.
      (2)   The record is kept for a period of no less than one year after the
trip.
      (3)   The record is written legibly in ink and includes the following
information:
         (i)   The Passenger's name or other identifier
         (ii)   The time of the scheduled pick-up of the Passenger
         (iii)   The location of the scheduled pick-up of the Passenger
         (iv)   The locations of any intermediate stops at which the Passenger
is picked up or dropped off
         (v)   The final destination of the Passenger
         (vi)   The time the trip was completed.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-19(b)
 
§ 59A-20 Operations – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Mailing Address and Email Address.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must report any change of Mailing Address or Email
Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days of the change.
 
35 RCNY §   Vehicle Owner Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-20(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the For-Hire Vehicle Owner.
      (3)   A Vehicle Owner must have a working Email Address at all times.
   (b)   Capacity for 24-Hour Access.
      (1)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must maintain a current telephone number
on file with the Commission.
      (2)   This number must be connected to an answering machine or must be a
pager number, an answering service telephone number, or something similar that
allows the Commission to reach the Vehicle Owner on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Owner Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-20(b)
 
§ 59A-21 Leasing a For-Hire Vehicle.
   (a)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner may lease a Vehicle to a Driver, or otherwise
make a Vehicle available to a Driver for use in exchange for compensation, for
any period of time if the Owner complies with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Written records required under this section must be provided to the
Driver who is leasing or otherwise obtaining the use of the Vehicle and must be
maintained in hard copy or electronically.
   (b)   Lease Must Be in Writing. 
      (1)   All leases, including any amendments, must be in writing and signed
by the lessor and leasing Driver. Electronic signatures are permissible for
electronic leases.
      (2)   A copy of the fully executed lease must be provided to the leasing
Driver upon lease execution and upon the Driver's request.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $500 per missing lease Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-21(b)(1)-(2)
 
      (3)   Terms. The lease must provide:
         (i)   The beginning date and time and ending date and time of the
lease.
         (ii)   All costs and possible fees that may be charged by the lessor.
            (A)   For each cost and fee that will be charged, the lease must
provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the cost or fee.
            (B)   For each cost and fee that may be charged, the lease must
provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the conditions that
will result in the imposition of such cost or fee.
            (C)   If a cancellation fee is included in the lease, the lease
must specify the minimum prior notice that must be provided by Drivers to avoid
the cancellation fee.
            (D)   The lease must specify if the Driver will be responsible for
physical damage to the vehicle. However, if the lessor Owner receives
compensation for damages to the Vehicle incurred from an entity other than the
Driver, any amount previously paid by the Driver as compensation for damages
must be refunded to the Driver.
            (E)   If the lease includes the conditional purchase of the
Vehicle, the lease must provide the Vehicle sales price and an itemized total
of all other fees and costs to be paid before title to the Vehicle will be
passed to the Driver.
            (F)   If the lessor permits subleasing, all restrictions on
subleases must be specified in the lease. These restrictions must include, at a
minimum, that only Drivers with a Valid TLC License may sublease the Vehicle.
            (G)   If a security deposit is included in the lease, the terms and
costs of the security deposit must be specified in the lease, including all
costs that may be reimbursed from the security deposit. The lease must provide
the number of days after termination of the lease, not to exceed 30 days, when
the lessor will return the security deposit.
      (4)   Overcharges. Every lease must contain clearly legible notice that
overcharging a Driver is prohibited by the Commission's Rules, and that
complaints of overcharges may be made to the Commission or by calling 311.
      (5)   [Reserved.] (limitations on costs and fees related to the lease of
a For-Hire Vehicle)
 
                 Fine: First violation: $500;
                 Second and subsequent violations: $1,000
                 and/or suspension for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §       In addition to the penalty payable to the  Appearance REQUIRED
59A-21(b)(3)-(5) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order
                 the lessor to pay restitution to the
                 Driver, equal to the amount charged to the
                 Driver in violation of this rule.
 
   (c)   Fees Charged to Drivers. 
      (1)   A lessor may require payment of only those costs and fees provided
in the lease. Requiring payment of costs and fees not provided in the lease is
an overcharge.
      (2)   A lessor cannot charge, request or accept a tip.
      (3)   A lessor cannot require payment of a summons not written to the
Driver, except the following summonses issued to the Vehicle Owner:
         (i)   Any parking tickets or red light violations issued during the
lease if the Driver was provided an opportunity to dispute the ticket; and
         (ii)   Fines for violation of 35 RCNY §
59B-26(a), provided that such fine was assessed because of the conduct of the
Driver, and provided further the lessor is able to show that the Driver had
notice of the inspection date, and provided further that the lease clearly
states that inspection of the Vehicle as required by 35 RCNY §
59B-26(a) is the responsibility of the Driver.
 
                 Fine: First violation: $500;
                 Second and subsequent violations: $1,000
                 and/or suspension for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §       In addition to the penalty payable to the  Appearance REQUIRED
59A-21(c)(1)-(3) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order
                 the lessor to pay restitution to the
                 Driver, equal to the amount charged to the
                 Driver in violation of this rule.
 
      (4)   Vehicle Availability. The lease payment must be pro-rated if the
Vehicle is unavailable for use during any part of the term of the lease for any
reason that is not the lessee's responsibility.
 
             Fine: First violation: $500;
             Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 and/
             or suspension for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §   In addition to the penalty payable to the      Appearance REQUIRED
59A-21(c)(4) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order the
             lessee to pay restitution to the Driver, equal
             to the amount charged to the Driver in
             violation of this rule.
 
      (5)   Interior Advertising System Revenue. A lessor cannot charge,
request or accept any fee from a driver for revenue generated from an Interior
Advertising System.
 
             Fine: First violation: $500; Second and
             subsequent violations: $1,000 and/or
35 RCNY §   suspension for up to 30 days. In addition
59A-21(c)(5) to the penalty payable to the Commission,  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             the lessor must pay restitution to the
             Driver, equal to the amount charged to the
             Driver in violation of this rule.
 
   (d)   Driver Earnings. 
      (1)   Driver earnings received by the lessor must be remitted to the
Driver. The lessor may only deduct costs and fees from the Driver's earnings if
those costs and fees are specified in the lease as required in Subdivision (b)
of this section and the lease further provides that such costs and fees will be
withheld from the Driver's earnings.
 
             Fine: First violation: $200
             Second violation: $300
35 RCNY §   Third violation: $500
59A-21(d)(1) In addition to the penalty payable to the      Appearance REQUIRED
             Commission, the Hearing Officer must order the
             lessor to pay restitution to the Driver, equal
             to the amount owed to the Driver.
 
      (2)   Drivers must be paid earnings within one week of a trip's
completion.
 
             Fine: $100
35 RCNY §   In addition to the penalty payable to the
59A-21(d)(2) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             the lessor to pay restitution to the
             Driver, equal to the cost to the Driver.
 
   (e)   Written Receipt. For every financial transaction completed under the
lease or these Rules, the lessor must give a written receipt to the Driver.
      (1)   The receipt must include the name of the Driver and the Vehicle
license number.
      (2)   The receipt must clearly state the following information with
respect to the payment or deduction:
         (i)   The date;
         (ii)   The name of the recipient;
         (iii)   The amount and calculations showing how the amount was
determined;
         (iv)   The purpose of the payment or deduction;
         (v)   The number of the section of this chapter or provision of the
lease that authorizes the payment or deduction; and
         (vi)   For leases including the conditional purchase of the Vehicle,
an accounting of the portion of each payment made under the lease that is
devoted to the conditional purchase of the Vehicle, the cumulative amount paid
towards the conditional purchase of the Vehicle, and the number of payments
remaining.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 per missing receipt Appearance REQUIRED
59A-21(e)
 
   (f)   Records Maintenance. A lessor must maintain for a period of three
years from the date a lease expires or is cancelled:
      (1)   A copy of the executed lease and any lease amendments;
      (2)   Records of all itemized earnings paid to Drivers;
      (3)   Records of all itemized payments received from Drivers;
      (4)   Records of all itemized security deposit withholdings; and
      (5)   Records of all Drivers subleasing the Vehicle, including the dates
and times of the sublease, the subleasing Drivers' names, DMV license number
and TLC Driver License number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 for each missing item Appearance REQUIRED
59A-21(f)
 
   (g)   Collective Bargaining Exception. The provisions of this section do not
apply to lessors and Drivers whose business relationship is governed by the
terms of a collective bargaining agreement.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59A-22 Operations – Reporting Requirements.
[Reserved.]
§ 59A-23 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Tolls – How Tolls are Paid. 
      (1)   All For-Hire Vehicles must be equipped with a New York MTA Bridges
& Tunnels EZ-Pass®.
      (2)   When a For-Hire Vehicle drives through a toll plaza with an EZ-
Pass®, MTA Bridges & Tunnels will automatically deduct the cost of the toll
from an account maintained by the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
      (3)   Passengers must pay for the toll, but only must pay the actual
amount (often a discounted toll) charged to the EZ-Pass®.
      (4)   Drivers must collect the proper toll amount from the passenger and
forward it to the holder of the EZ-Pass® tag.
   (b)   Tolls – What Tolls are Paid by Passenger. 
      (1)   On all trips within the City of New York, the passenger must pay:
         (i)   All tolls incurred during the trip except for trips as follows:
            A.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge
to Queens.
            B.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Marine Parkway – Gil
Hodges Memorial Bridge to Brooklyn.
            C.   From Staten Island over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to
Brooklyn.
         (ii)   Two times the amount of the toll if incurred during the trip:
            A.   From Queens over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge to the Rockaway
Peninsula.
            B.   From Brooklyn over the Marine Parkway – Gil Hodges Memorial
Bridge to the Rockaway Peninsula.
            C.   From Brooklyn over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to Staten
Island.
      (2)   On trips beyond the City of New York, the passenger must pay all
necessary tolls to and from the destination.
      (3)   A Driver who charges a passenger more than the actual amount of the
EZ-Pass® toll is guilty of an overcharge as prohibited by 35 RCNY §
80-17(a) and will be subject to the penalties provided in 35 RCNY §
80-02(e).
      (4)   A Driver who fails to reimburse an EZ-Pass® tag holder for all toll
charges incurred, including toll charges for which there is no passenger
reimbursement, will be subject to the penalties provided for violation of 35
RCNY §
80-15(d)(4).
      (5)   In addition to any other penalty permitted, the Commission can
order restitution to a passenger or the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
(Added City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/20232; amended City Record 10/30/2023,
eff. 11/29/2023)
§ 59A-24 Operations – EZ-Pass® Required.
   (a)   EZ-Pass® Account. All For-Hire Vehicle Owners must participate in the
EZ-Pass® New York Program by maintaining a current account with the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority, Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority
("MTA Bridges and Tunnels" or "MTA B&T").
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-24(a)
 
   (b)   EZ-Pass® Tags Required on all For-Hire Vehicles. 
      (1)   For-Hire Vehicle Owners must either:
         (i)   Equip all of Owner's For-Hire Vehicles with an MTA Bridges and
Tunnels EZ-Pass® tag, each of which must be attached as required by MTA B&T, or
         (ii)   Allow a Driver to use their personal EZ-Pass® tag.
      (2)   For-Hire Vehicle Owners must have available at least one MTA
Bridges and Tunnels tag for each of their For-Hire Vehicle licenses.
      (3)   Owners must maintain a sufficient balance in their EZ-Pass®
account, according to what is required by the EZ-Pass program.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59A-24(b)
 
   (c)   Driver Provides EZ-Pass® Tag. 
      (1)   A Driver can choose to use their own EZ-Pass® tag.
      (2)   If a Driver uses their own EZ-Pass®, the Driver keeps the toll
money paid by the passenger, or is reimbursed the amount of the toll(s) if the
passenger pays by credit or debit card.
   (d)   For-Hire Vehicle Owner Provides EZ-Pass® Tag. 
      (1)   Funds Accrue to Owner. When a For-Hire Vehicle Owner provides the
EZ-Pass® tag, the Driver must ensure that all of the monies paid by a passenger
for toll(s) accrue to the For-Hire Vehicle Owner.
         (i)   If the customer pays by cash, the Driver will forward the money
to the For-Hire Vehicle Owner at the end of the shift or lease.
         (ii)   If the customer pays by credit or debit card, the For-Hire
Vehicle Owner will retain any amount paid for toll(s).
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-24(d)(1)
 
      (2)   For-Hire Vehicle Owner can Require Driver to Maintain a
"Replenishment" Account. 
         (i)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner who is the EZ-Pass® tag holder can
require a Driver who is Dispatched in one of Owner's For-Hire Vehicles for one
or more shifts to maintain an EZ-Pass® replenishment account with the For-Hire
Vehicle Owner.
         (ii)   The For-Hire Vehicle Owner can require a Driver to maintain a
maximum of $10 for every 12-hour shift included within a lease period, up to a
maximum of $100, in the replenishment account for the benefit of For-Hire
Vehicle Owner.
         (iii)   The For-Hire Vehicle Owner can collect from the replenishment
account any tolls paid by the For-Hire Vehicle Owner's EZ-Pass® account for a
tag assigned to a Taxicab operated by the Driver, for which the For-Hire
Vehicle Owner has not been reimbursed.
         (iv)   Any funds held in the replenishment account that are not used
to reimburse the For-Hire Vehicle Owner must be returned to a Driver within 30
days after the termination of the Driver's lease with the For-Hire Vehicle
Owner.
         (v)   An Agent has the same rights and obligations as a For-Hire
Vehicle Owner under this paragraph 35 RCNY §
58-27(d)(2).
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $250 plus restitution to the Driver of
59A-24(d)(2) any replenishment account improperly retained Appearance REQUIRED
             by the For-Hire Vehicle Owner
 
(Added City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 59A-25 Operations – Miscellaneous Operating Requirements.
   (a)   Passenger Trips by Pre-Arrangement Only.
      (1)   No For-Hire Vehicle Owner will allow Owner's Vehicle(s) to
transport Passengers for hire other than through pre-arrangement with a Base
licensed by the Commission.
      (2)   A For-Hire Vehicle Owner will be liable for penalties for any
violation of this section.
 
            Vehicle: during any license term, $100 for the
35 RCNY §  first violation during such term, with the     Appearance REQUIRED
59A-25(a)   penalty increasing by $100 for each subsequent
            violation up to a maximum of $10,000.
 
   (b)   [Repealed.]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 59A-26 Vehicles – Inspections.
   (a)   Tri-Annual Inspections.
      (1)   For-Hire Vehicles must be regularly inspected three times every
year, including at least once every four months. 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e)(1) and (f)(1) specifies that inspections required for new and renewal
applications must be done at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division
facility, except as specifically set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f); the other required inspections can be done at any DMV
registered facility.
      (2)   Exception for vehicles seating 10 or more passengers (including the
driver) and stretched vehicles. A Vehicle which either:
         (i)   seats 10 or more passengers and is not exempt from NYS
Department of Transportation operating authority and inspection requirements,
or
         (ii)   has been modified after manufacture and which is not exempt
from NYS Department of Transportation operating authority and inspection
requirements must be inspected two times a year by the NYS Department of
Transportation. Each Inspection will be performed as required by the NYS
Department of Transportation and its regulations.
 
            Fine: $100 and suspension of the Vehicle Owner
35 RCNY §  License until any defect found is corrected or Appearance REQUIRED
59A-26(a)   until the vehicle passes inspection, including
            any applicable inspection by the NYS DOT.
 
   (b)   On-Street Inspections. Any officer or employee of the Commission
designated by the Chairperson or any police officer can conduct on-street
inspections of any For-Hire Vehicle operating within New York City to assure
compliance with all applicable laws and rules and can order the Vehicle to
report to the Commission's inspection facility.
 
            Fine: Suspension of For-Hire Vehicle
35 RCNY §  License or recognition of issuing    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-26(b)   jurisdiction vehicle License until
            compliance.
 
§ 59A-27 Vehicles – Meets Safety Standards.
   (a)   Unsafe or Unfit Vehicles.
      (1)   No For-Hire Vehicle can be used in a For-Hire Vehicle service when
the Commission or the New York State DMV has determined that the vehicle is
unsafe or unfit for use as a For-Hire Vehicle and the Owner has been directed
to remove the vehicle from service.
      (2)   If the Chairperson has determined that the Vehicle is unsafe or
unfit, the Decals will be confiscated by the Chairperson.
      (3)   If the New York State DMV or a DMV inspection facility other than
the Commission has determined that the Vehicle is unsafe or unfit, the Vehicle
Owner must return the Decals to the Chairperson within 72 hours of issuance of
the determination.
      (4)   If the Chairperson has any reason to believe that any For-Hire
Vehicle is unsafe or unfit for use, the Chairperson can order the Vehicle to
report to the Commission's inspection facility.
      (5)   The License of an Owner who operates a vehicle that has been
determined to be unsafe or unfit for use will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – 350 and/or suspension up to 30 days; Suspension until Appearance
59A-27(a)   compliance.                                                          REQUIRED
 
   (b)   Seat and Shoulder Belts. Each For-Hire Vehicle must have all seat
belts and shoulder belts clearly visible, accessible, and in good working
order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – 25Appearance REQUIRED
59A-27(b)
 
   (c)   Shoulder Belts Required. In addition to seat belts for each seating
position and shoulder belts for both outside front seat positions, all For-Hire
Vehicles must be equipped with shoulder belts for both outside Passenger rear
seat positions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – 25Appearance REQUIRED
59A-27(c)
 
   (d)   Correct Defect Directives. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must comply with
all Commission notices and directives to correct defects in the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 and suspension until the defective Appearance REQUIRED
59A-27(d)   condition is corrected
 
   (e)   Daily Personal Inspection by Owner. A For-Hire Vehicle Owner must not
permit a For-Hire Vehicle to be operated without daily personal inspection and
reasonable determination that all equipment, including brakes, lights, signals,
and Passenger seatbelts and shoulder belts, are in good working order and meet
all the requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and these
Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
59A-27(e)   hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 59A-28 Vehicles – Miscellaneous Requirements and Vehicle Retirement.
   (a)   Post-Manufacture Alterations.
      (1)   No For-Hire Vehicle can be altered after manufacture:
         (i)   To increase its length, width, weight or seating capacity, or
         (ii)   To modify its chassis and/or body design.
      (2)   Exception for all types of Vehicles. A For-Hire Vehicle can also be
altered, after manufacture, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all
of the following:
         (i)   The modification has been made under a program approved in
advance by the original vehicle manufacturer, and
         (ii)   The alteration has been performed by an entity approved and
certified by the vehicle manufacturer to perform such alterations.
         (iii)   An original, unaltered, approved vehicle modifier's
certification sticker must be affixed to the Vehicle on the left center post or
hinge post.
      (3)   Exception for Vehicles seating 10 or more passengers (including the
driver) and NOT exempt from NYS DOT Requirements. 
         A For-Hire Vehicle can be altered, after manufacture, provided that
the Vehicle, as modified, meets all of the following:
         (i)   The Vehicle, as modified, has been approved by the NYS
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under Section 401(1)(b) of the NYS Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
         (ii)   The Vehicle has passed inspection by the NYS Department of
Transportation under 17 NYCRR § 720.
         (iii)   For such modified For-Hire Vehicles, the inspections required
by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f) and 35 RCNY §
59A-26(a) and the requirement to meet safety standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-27, will be inspections of, and determinations by, the NYS Department of
Transportation.
         (iv)   A modified For-Hire Vehicle must still pass a visual inspection
at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division at application and renewal as
required by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f).
         (v)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (vi)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (vii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (viii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (ix)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (4)   Exception for Vehicles seating 10 or more passengers (including the
driver) and exempt from NYS DOT Requirements. A For-Hire Vehicle can be
altered, after manufacture, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all
of the following:
         (i)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (ii)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (iii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (iv)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (v)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (5)   Exception for modified Vehicles seating 9 or fewer and exempt from
NYS DOT inspection and operating authority requirements. 
         A For-Hire Vehicle can be altered, after manufacture, even if the
original vehicle manufacturer has not approved the program, provided that the
Vehicle, as modified, meets all of the following:
         (i)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (ii)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (iii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (iv)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (v)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (6)   Exception for modified Vehicles seating 9 or fewer and NOT exempt
from NYS DOT inspection and operating authority requirements. 
         A For-Hire Vehicle can be altered, after manufacture, even if the
original vehicle manufacturer has not approved the program, provided that the
Vehicle, as modified, meets all of the following:
         (i)   The Vehicle, as modified, has been approved by the NYS
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under Section 401(1)(b) of the NYS Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
         (ii)   The Vehicle has passed inspection by the NYS Department of
Transportation under 17 NYCRR § 720.
         (iii)   For such modified For-Hire Vehicles, the inspections required
by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f) and 35 RCNY §
59A-26(a) and the requirement to meet safety standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-27, will be inspections of, and determinations by, the NYS Department of
Transportation.
         (iv)   A modified For-Hire Vehicle must still pass a visual inspection
at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division at application and renewal as
required by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f).
         (v)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (vi)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (vii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (viii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (ix)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
 
            Vehicle Owner Fine: $10,000 and License
35 RCNY §  suspension until compliance if alteration is Appearance REQUIRED
59A-28(a)   not approved or revocation if the vehicle is
            not brought into compliance within 30 days
 
   (b)   Proper Vehicle Identification Required.
      (1)   License Plate Number Matches. The license plate number on the motor
vehicle tax stamp, on the state registration certificate, and on the Commission
Decals must match each other and must match the number on the license plates
applied to the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
59A-28(b)(1) hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing.
 
      (2)   Vehicle Identification Number Matches. The last six digits of the
vehicle identification number (VIN) on the Commission Decals must match the
last six digits of the VIN on the state registration, and the VIN on the
Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-28(b)(2)
 
      (3)   T & LC License Plates. A For-Hire Vehicle that is registered in New
York must have New York State license plates affixed to the Vehicle that are
embossed with the legend "T & LC".
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 – $350 and Suspension until Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-28(b)(3) compliance
 
   (c)   Two-Door Vehicles Prohibited. No For-Hire Vehicle can be a two door
vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension of the Vehicle Owner License Appearance REQUIRED
59A-28(c)
 
   (d)   [Repealed.]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 59A-29 Vehicles – Markings & Advertising.
   (a)   Valid License Decals.
      (1)   Three Valid Commission License Decals must be plainly visible and
affixed to the Vehicle in the following locations:
         (i)   One Decal must be on the lower front right side of the
windshield
         (ii)   One Decal must be on the lower rear corner of each of the two
rear quarter windows; if there are no rear quarter windows, the Decals must be
on the lower rear window just above the rear door.
         (iii)   The Decals must be affixed by Commission staff.
      (2)   New Decals must be placed on the Vehicle by the Commission Safety
and Emissions Division:
         (i)   When the License is renewed;
         (ii)   If the Vehicle is replaced, changes affiliation, or changes its
license plates.
      (3)   Exception for Luxury Limousines. Any For-Hire Vehicle that is a
Luxury Limousine will only be required to have a single Commission Decal
affixed to the lower right side of the front windshield.
 
            Failure to have proper Decal(s):
            $500 for the first offense in 12 months
35 RCNY §
59A-29(a)   $1,000 for the second and subsequent       Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            offenses within a 12-month period and
            suspension of the For-Hire Vehicle License
            until compliance.
 
   (b)   Valid Registration Sticker. A Valid registration sticker from an
authorized state motor vehicle department must be affixed to the left front
windshield so as to be plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(b)
 
   (c)   Inspection Sticker. A Valid New York State DMV inspection sticker that
has no fewer than eight months left before the sticker expires must be plainly
visible on the front left side of the front windshield.
 
            Vehicle Owner Fine: $100 and suspension of the
35 RCNY §  Vehicle Owner License until any defect found is Appearance REQUIRED
59A-29(c)   corrected
            Penalty Points: 1.
 
   (d)   Prohibited Colors for Vehicle Exteriors. No For-Hire Vehicle can be,
in whole or in part, any shade of Taxicab Yellow, and no For-Hire Vehicle not
licensed and Valid to operate as a Street Hail Livery can be, in whole or in
part, any shade of Apple Green as authorized for use with a Street Hail Livery
provided in 35 RCNY
Chapter 82 of these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 for the first violation; $500 for
59A-29(d)   the second violation in 24 months; revocation Appearance REQUIRED
            for the third violation in 36 months
 
   (e)   Prohibited Advertising.
      (1)   An Owner must not display any advertising on the exterior or the
interior of a For-Hire Vehicle unless the advertising has been authorized by
the Commission and a License has been issued to the Owner following the
provisions of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   The Commission will not approve any advertising for the exterior of
a For-Hire Vehicle that consists, in whole or in part, of roof top advertising.
      (3)   An Owner must not display or attempt to display any advertising on
the interior of a For-Hire Vehicle unless the advertising has been authorized
by the Commission and a License has been issued to the Interior Advertising
Provider in accordance with the provisions of
Subchapter 59E of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: 100 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(e)   $200 if found guilty following a hearing
 
   (f)   Motor Vehicle Tax Stamp.
      (1)   For Vehicles registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles prior
to April 30, 1999, a Valid NYC commercial use motor vehicle tax stamp must be
affixed to the front right side of the windshield of the Vehicle so as to be
plainly visible.
      (2)   For Vehicles registered after April 30, 1999, the Owner must show
proof that the required commercial use motor vehicle tax for the current tax
period has been paid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(f)
 
   (g)   Base Station Affiliation Signs. For-Hire Vehicles must identify their
Affiliated Base Station on the exterior of the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   The name of the Base Station, its License number and telephone
number in one of the following ways:
         (i)   In letters and numerals at least one-and-one-half inches in
height, on the outside of a door or doors on both sides of the Vehicle, below
the windows and at least six inches above the bottom of the door(s);
         (ii)   In letters and numerals at least one inch in height in one
location on the rear of the Vehicle below the rear window, and at least six
inches above the bottom of the rear of the Vehicle, or
         (iii)   Both on the doors and rear of the Vehicle.
      (2)   The letters and numerals must be of a color that contrasts with the
color of the body of the Vehicle so that it is easy to see and read.
      (3)   Lettering and numbering must be spaced to provide easy legibility
and, if placed on doors on both sides of the Vehicle must be identical on both
sides of the livery.
      (4)   All Decals must be semi-permanent adhesive stickers.
      (5)   Exemption. Luxury Limousines and Black Cars are exempt from the
requirements of this subdivision.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(g)
 
   (h)   Required Signage for Accessible Vehicles. Any Accessible Vehicle
licensed by the Commission must display signs that identifies the Vehicle as an
Accessible Vehicle. The signs design will be provided by the Commission on its
Web site or through other appropriate means as announced on its Web site. The
signs must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars of a sedan or an
SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both sides of the
Vehicle.
      (2)   Must be visible to Passengers entering the accessible Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(h)
 
   (i)   Required Signage for Clean-Air Vehicles. Any Clean Air For-Hire
Vehicle licensed by the Commission must display signs that identify the Vehicle
as a Clean Air Vehicle. The signs design will be provided by the Commission on
its Web site or through other appropriate means as announced on its Web site.
The signs must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars of a sedan or an
SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both sides of the
Vehicle.
      (2)   Must be visible to Passengers entering the clean air vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(i)
 
   (j)   Required Sticker. Each For hire-vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing."
The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The
sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. The
sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(j)(1) and (2)
 
   (k)   Optional Sticker. For hire-vehicles may display an optional external
sticker, with the following inscription: "The choices you make behind the wheel
matter." The dimensions of the sticker are 15 inches wide by 4 inches wide. The
sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. If
displayed, the sticker must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (l)   Required Sticker. Each For Hire-Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver
Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the
sticker are 8.0 inches wide by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Incorporated into the Livery Bill of Rights.
The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to black cars and luxury
limousines.
   (m)   Optional Sticker. Each For Hire-Vehicle may display an external safety
sticker, with the following inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are
Protected By New York State Law ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By
Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5
inches wide by 3.5 inches high. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the
instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
 
      (1)   On a rear passenger window.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
59A-29(l)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (n)   Required Decal. Each For-Hire Vehicle with Hearing Induction Loop
capability must display a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature
the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile
of an ear with a wide diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top
right. The symbol contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will
be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will include
the language "Induction loop installed. Switch hearing aid to T-coil." The
decal will be placed as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
59A-29(n)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (o)   Required Decal. Each For-Hire Vehicle must display decals provided by
the Commission warning passengers to look for cyclists before opening the door.
Such decals must be placed on the inside of both rear passenger doors.
 
            Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
35 RCNY §  $75 if found guilty following a hearing. No Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-29(o)   penalty for missing decal if condition is
            corrected within 10 days
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 2/4/2025,
eff. 3/6/2025; amended City Record 9/25/2025, eff. 10/25/2025)
§ 59A-30 Vehicles – Items Required to be in Vehicle.
   (a)   Required Items. Each For-Hire Vehicle must have:
      (1)   On the right visor, on top of the right side of the dashboard, or
in the glove compartment:
         (i)   The certificate of registration or a legible copy of it
         (ii)   The insurance card or a legible copy of it
      (2)   A protective holder to display the TLC Driver License attached to
the back of the driver's seat.
      (3)   Exception for Black Cars and Luxury Limousines.
         (i)   Black Cars and Luxury Limousines must comply with all
requirements of this subdivision (a) except that these Vehicles will not be
required to have a protective holder mounted behind the driver's seat to
display the TLC Driver License.
         (ii)   The TLC Driver License must, however, be displayed in the
Vehicle in a way so as to be clearly visible from the Passenger seat and
available for inspection by the Passenger upon request.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $50 for each violation of this rule;
59A-30(a)(1)-(3) however, no fine for a violation of this   Appearance REQUIRED
                 rule can exceed $100
 
      (4)   Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights.
         (i)   Every Livery Vehicle Owner must post a Livery Passengers' Bill
of Rights in a form and format prescribed by the Commission.
         (ii)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site or will provide the information through other appropriate means that will
be posted on its Web site.
         (iii)   The Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights must be placed in a
protective holder attached to the back of the front Passenger's seat.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
59A-30(a)(4) hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing.
 
      (5)   Modified Vehicles. If the Vehicle has been modified after
manufacture and IS exempt from NYS Department of Transportation inspection and
authorization requirements, a copy of the valid exemption letter from the NYS
Department of Transportation must be kept in the Vehicle at all times.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-30(a)(5)
 
      (6)   A copy of the receipt issued by the Commission, if any, or other
proof of payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-30(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Trip Record.
      (1)   The Trip Record required in 35 RCNY §
59A-19(b) must be kept in the Vehicle during any trip between New York City and
an Issuing Jurisdiction, including a trip through either New York City or an
Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (2)   On request, the Trip Record must be presented for inspection to any
police officer or peace officer acting in his or her special duties or to other
persons authorized by the Commission or by the Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (3)   Failure to present the Trip Record as required when requested by an
authorized person will be presumptive evidence of an unlicensed operation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-30(b)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 59A-31 Vehicle – Equipment.
   (a)   Heating and Air Conditioning. The Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle must be
responsible for ensuring that the Vehicle is equipped with functioning heating
and air conditioning equipment.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-31(a)
 
   (b)   Roof Light. A For-Hire Vehicle must not be equipped with a roof light,
except for a Vehicle that operates primarily in Staten Island and is affiliated
with a Base located in Staten Island. A roof light on a Staten Island Vehicle
must be approved.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 – first violation                                              Appearance
59A-31(b)   $500 – second violation in 24 months Revocation for third violation in 36 REQUIRED
            months
 
   (c)   Taximeter. No For-Hire Vehicle can be equipped with a Taximeter except
a wheelchair accessible Livery which is participating in the dispatch program
as described in 35 RCNY Chapter 3 of this title or a Street Hail Livery
pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-51.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-31(c)
 
   (d)   Distress Signaling Light – Livery Vehicle.
      (1)   Requirement. Livery Vehicles must be equipped with a help or
distress signaling light system as required by the specifications in 35 RCNY §
59C-03.
 
            Fine: $175 and suspension until the
35 RCNY §  condition is corrected. Respondent must     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-31(d)   provide a condition corrected form issued
            by the TLC's Safety and Emissions Division.
 
   (e)   Electronic Dispatching Device. In addition to the dispatch equipment
required by the Vehicle's affiliated Base pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-15(d)(1), a For-Hire Vehicle may be equipped with the following electronic
device(s) provided that that the device(s) is mounted in a fixed position and
not hand-held and use of the electronic device(s) is limited to either voice or
one-touch preprogrammed buttons or keys while the Vehicle is in motion:
      (1)   If the dispatch equipment required by the Vehicle's affiliated Base
is capable of accepting dispatches from other Bases, ONE electronic device that
is used to accept dispatches from a Base.
      (2)   If the dispatch equipment required by the Vehicle's affiliated Base
is not capable of accepting dispatches from other Bases, TWO electronic devices
that are used to accept dispatches from a Base.
   (f)   Approved Electronic Tablet. A For-Hire Vehicle may be equipped with
one Approved Electronic Tablet pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59E-22(i), provided that the device is mounted in a fixed position and not
hand-held, and provided further that the Driver’s use of the Approved
Electronic Tablet is limited to either voice or preprogrammed buttons while the
vehicle is in motion.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
59A-31(f)   hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City
Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59A-32 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions for Livery Vehicles. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59A-33 Vehicle Equipment – In-Vehicle Camera System (IVCS).
   (a)   Required Signage About In-Vehicle Camera System. Each For-Hire Vehicle
equipped with an in-vehicle camera system must display Decals on each rear
Passenger window, visible to the outside, that contain the following
information in letters at least one-half inch high: "This vehicle is equipped
with camera security. You will be photographed."
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59A-33(a)   $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59A-34 Taxicab Specific Vehicle Equipment.
[Reserved.]
§ 59A-35 Penalty Points for For-Hire Vehicles.
   (a)   Four Penalty Points Requires License Revocation. The License of any
For-Hire Vehicle that accumulates four penalty points for violations during any
License term will be revoked.
   (b)   Points Accrued but not Assessed Before Renewal.
      (1)   If points are imposed after a Vehicle License has been renewed
based on a violation that occurred before the renewal, the points will be added
to the total points accumulated by the Vehicle before its renewal.
      (2)   If the additional Points raise the total number to four or more
Points, the Vehicle License will be revoked.
   (c)   Revocation Process.
      (1)   The Chairperson can begin revocation proceedings whenever a
Licensee has been assessed four or more points during the current term of that
License.
      (2)   The Licensee's License can also be revoked as part of the decision
imposing the final point necessary for revocation.
      (3)   At any time revocation of a Base License is mandated and the last
penalty point arises from the same incident that created the For-Hire Vehicle
License revocation mandate, separate proceedings must be held for the Base
License revocation and the Vehicle License revocation.
   (d)   The Chairperson will develop a point reduction program applicable to
Vehicles and Bases.
   (e)   No penalty points will be imposed for violations occurring before
August 1, 2009.
§ 59A-36. Storage of For-Hire Vehicle Licenses.
   (a)   Short-Term For-Hire Vehicle License Storage Program. 
      (1)   Description of Program. A Licensee may put their For-Hire Vehicle
License in storage with the Commission for up to 90 days once during every two
year license term, during which time the TLC will not enforce insurance or
inspection requirements set forth in this Subchapter
59A, or pursuant to any other applicable TLC rules, subject to the following
terms.
      (2)   Application, Criteria and Approval. In order to be placed into the
Short-Term For-Hire Vehicle License Storage Program:
         (i)   All suspensions must be cleared, and the licensee must pay all
fines and fees due to TLC,
         (ii)   Plates must be surrendered to the DMV within 60 days prior to
the storage date,
         (iii)   The licensee must submit an application as set forth by the
Commission, and
         (iv)   Licenses with pending transfers will not be permitted to go
into storage.
      (3)   Removal from Storage. To remove a license from storage, a Licensee
must submit an application as prescribed by the Commission, and if the period
the license is in storage exceeds the renewal date, the licensee must complete
all renewal requirements.
      (4)   Licenses Remaining in Storage at the End of the Storage Period. Any
For-Hire Vehicle License not taken out of storage when the 90-day period has
ended will be subject to fines and suspension for failure to follow directives
to exit the storage program as set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-13(j)(1), as well as revocation for non-use pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59A-08(c) if they are not in use for 60 or more days after the 90-day storage
period has ended.
   (b)   COVID-19 For-Hire Vehicle License Storage Program, End of Program. 
      (1)   End of Program. The COVID-19 For-Hire Vehicle License Storage
Program established in 2020 ends on August 31, 2023.
      (2)   Licenses Remaining in Storage at the End of the Program. Any For-
Hire Vehicle License not taken out of storage when the COVID-19 For-Hire
Vehicle License Storage Program ends on August 31, 2023 will not be transferred
to the new Short-Term For-Hire Vehicle License Storage Program. For-Hire
Vehicle Licenses in storage after the program end date, August 31, 2023, that
are not expired will be subject to fines and suspension for failure to follow
directives to exit the storage program as set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-13(j)(1), as well as revocation for non-use pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59A-08(c) if they are not in use for 60 or more days after the program has
ended.
(Added City Record 9/29/2023, eff. 10/29/2023)
Subchapter 59B: For-Hire Base Owners
§ 59B-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures, rules and regulations for obtaining and
maintaining a For-Hire Base License.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violations of the rules and requirements for
maintaining a For-Hire Base License.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed (except as provided in this Subchapter), or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a License or Authorization from
the Commission;
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 59B-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal For-Hire Base License.
   (b)   Base Agreement is any agreement or terms or conditions a Driver or
Vehicle owner must accept or agree to in order to receive a dispatch from the
For-Hire Base, any costs or fees the Driver or Vehicle owner must pay to a For-
Hire Base, or any schedules or formulas used to calculate Driver or Vehicle
owner earnings.
   (c)   Black Car is a Vehicle that affiliates with a Black Car Base or with a
High-Volume For-Hire Service.
   (d)   Black Car Base is a "central dispatch facility" (as the term is
defined in New York Executive Law, § 160-cc) and For-Hire Base, excluding a
High-Volume For-Hire Service, that operates as follows:
      (1)   All Black Car Vehicles are dispatched on a pre-arranged basis;
      (2)   All Black Car Vehicles are owned by franchisees of the Base or are
members of a cooperative that operates the Base; and
      (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of the Base's business is on a
payment basis other than direct cash payment by a Passenger.
   (e)   Black Car Fund is the New York Black Car Operators' Injury
Compensation Fund, Inc. established under Article 6-F of the NYS Executive Law.
   (f)   Driver in this Subchapter means a For-Hire Driver.
   (g)   For-Hire Base (or "Base") is the Commission-licensed business for
dispatching For-Hire Vehicles and the physical location from which For-Hire
Vehicles are dispatched; a For Hire Base can be any of the following:
      (1)   A Black Car Base,
      (2)   A Livery Base (or Base Station),
      (3)   A Luxury Limousine Base,
      (4)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service.
   (h)   For-Hire Driver in this Subchapter means a Driver of a For-Hire
Vehicle.
   (i)   For-Hire Vehicle is a motor Vehicle Licensed by the Commission to
carry Passengers For-Hire in the City, which:
      (1)   Has a seating capacity of 20 or fewer Passengers
      (2)   Has three or more doors
      (3)   Is not a Taxicab, a Commuter Van, or an authorized bus as defined
by NYS law
   (j)   Independent Base Station is a Livery Base Station that is designated
as an independent livery base under § 18-c of the NYS Workers' Compensation Law
because it has joined the Livery Fund.
   (k)   Independent Livery Driver is the Driver of a Livery which is
affiliated with an Independent Base Station.
   (l)   License in this Subchapter means a For-Hire Base License.
   (m)   Livery is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a Livery Base
Station.
   (n)   Livery Base Station ("Base" or "Base Station") is a For-Hire Base that
operates as follows:
      (1)   Livery Vehicles are dispatched from the Base on a pre-arranged
basis.
      (2)   Livery Vehicles are designed to carry fewer than six (6)
Passengers.
      (3)   Passengers are charged for service on the basis of a flat rate,
time, mileage, or zones.
   (o)   Livery Fund is the independent livery driver benefit fund established
under Article 6-G of the NYS Executive Law.
   (p)   Luxury Limousine is a For-Hire Vehicle that is affiliated with a
Luxury Limousine Base.
   (q)   Luxury Limousine Base is a For-Hire Base that operates as follows:
      (1)   All Luxury Limousines are dispatched from the Base by pre-
arrangement.
      (2)   Luxury Limousine Vehicles have a seating capacity of 20 or fewer
Passengers.
      (3)   More than ninety percent (90%) of its business is on a payment
basis other than direct cash payment by a Passenger.
      (4)   Passengers are charged "garage to garage" service on the basis of a
flat rate, time or mileage.
   (r)   Mailing Address for a For-Hire Base will be the Base address.
   (s)   Owner in this Subchapter refers to a For-Hire Base Owner. An Owner can
be a Business Entity or a person.
   (t)   Penalty Point is a non-monetary penalty assessed against either a Base
Owner or the Owner of a For-Hire Vehicle if they are convicted of certain
violations in this Chapter.
   (u)   Respondent means an individual or Business Entity who has been noticed
and charged with a violation of one or more of these Rules or the
Administrative Code, or with being unfit to hold a License.
   (v)   Vehicle in this Subchapter refers to a For-Hire Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] Identification.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (c)   Fingerprinting to Verify Good Moral Character.
      (1)   Initial Applicants. An individual or all Limited Business Entity
Persons of a Business Entity applying for a Base License must be fingerprinted
for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the New York State
Division of Criminal Justice Services.
      (2)   Review of Criminal History. The criminal history must be reviewed
in a manner consistent with Article 23-A of the New York State Correction Law.
      (3)   Additions or Changes to Applicant. Before or within five days after
any change or addition to the Limited Business Entity Persons of a Business
Entity Licensee:
         (i)   The Licensee must file an application with the Commission for
approval of the change or addition on forms that are prescribed by the
Commission.
         (ii)   The new Limited Business Entity Person(s) must be fingerprinted
as required by this subdivision.
      (4)   The Applicant or Licensee must pay any processing fee required.
   (d)   [Reserved.] Designate Drivers as Agents to Receive Service.
   (e)   Bond Required.
      (1)   Before a For-Hire Base License will be issued or renewed, the
Applicant must provide the Commission with a bond in the amount of $5,000 with
one or more sureties to be approved by the Commission.
      (2)   The bond must be for the benefit of New York City and must
guarantee the following:
         (i)   The Licensee will dispatch only vehicles that are currently
licensed by the Commission and that have a current New York City commercial use
motor vehicle tax stamp.
         (ii)   The Licensee will pay all civil penalties owed for violating
any provision of this Chapter.
      (3)   The bond will permit the Commission to draw upon the bond to pay
any penalties owed by the Base for any violation of this Chapter that has not
been paid when due or after completion of any appeal.
         (i)   The Chairperson will give the Base Owner 30 days' notice before
drawing upon the bond to pay any penalty.
         (ii)   If the Commission has to draw on the bond, the Base Owner will
be assessed one Penalty Point.
      (4)   The bond must be maintained by the Base Owner for the term of the
License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 for failure to post or maintain
59B-04(e)   bond; Penalty Points: One Penalty Point for Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            draw on bond.
 
   (f)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (g)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (h)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (i)   Fit to Hold License. An Applicant (including the individual, Business
Entity or any Limited Business Entity Persons) must demonstrate that they are
Fit to Hold a License.
§ 59B-04.1 Licensing – Issuance of Street Hail Livery Base Licenses.
   (a)   Issuance of Licenses. The Commission can issue up to 450 Street Hail
Livery Base Licenses. The Commission can re-issue any Street Hail Livery Base
Licenses when such licenses are revoked, surrendered, not renewed or otherwise
terminated by a holder or the Commission.
   (b)   Initial Issuance Period.
      (1)   Priority to Licensed Bases. During the one month period following
issuance of the first Street Hail Livery License which is the Initial Street
Hail Livery Base Issuance Period, only a Livery Base that is licensed by the
Commission and is in good standing can obtain a Street Hail Livery Base
License.
      (2)   Good Standing. For purposes of the Street Hail Livery Base Issuance
Period Initial, a Livery Base is in good standing and may participate in the
issuance if the Base:
         (i)   Has been continuously in operation as a Licensed Livery Base for
at least three years on the date of Street Hail Livery Base License application
and
         (ii)   Has no outstanding fines, summonses or suspensions as of the
date of the application for the Street Hail Livery Base License.
   (c)   Second Issuance Period.
      (1)   Priority to Licensed Livery and Paratransit Bases. During the
Second Street Hail Livery Base Issuance Period (that is, the five month period
following the Initial Street Hail Livery Base Issuance Period), a Street Hail
Livery Base License can be issued only to the following types of bases and only
if those bases are in good standing.
         (i)   A Livery Base
         (ii)   A Paratransit Base
         (iii)   A Commuter Van Service
      (2)   Good Standing. For purposes of the Second Street Hail Livery Base
Issuance Period, a base is in good standing and may participate in the issuance
if that base:
         (i)   Has been continuously in operation as a Licensed Livery Base or
Paratransit Base or Commuter Van Service for at least three years on the date
of Street Hail Livery Base License application and
         (ii)   Has no outstanding fines, summonses or suspensions as of the
date of the application for the Street Hail Livery Base License.
   (d)   Issuance following Initial and Second Issuance Periods.
      (1)   After the Street Hail Livery Base Initial and Second Issuance
Period, any person or Business Entity can apply for a Street Hail Livery Base
License.
   (e)   Each Applicant for a Street Hail Livery Base License must meet all the
requirements of this Chapter.
   (f)   An Applicant which also holds a Paratransit Base License or Commuter
Van Service Authorization must continue to comply with requirements applicable
to such license for all vehicle dispatched under that license.
§ 59B-04.2 Licensing – Street Hail Livery Base Can Act as Representative.
   (a)   Upon notice to the Commission, in a manner prescribed by the
Commission, the Owner of a Street Hail Livery License may designate an
individual Owner of a Street Hail Livery Base with which such Owner of a Street
Hail Livery License is affiliated, or a Limited Business Entity Person of a
Business Entity that owns a Street Hail Livery Base with which such Owner of a
Street Hail Livery License is affiliated, to appear before the Commission as a
representative of such Owner of a Street Hail Livery License. Upon notice to
the Commission and in a manner prescribed by the Commission, an applicant for a
Street Hail License seeking to affiliate with a Street Hail Livery Base may
designate an individual Owner of a Street Hail Livery Base with which such
applicant is seeking to affiliate, or a Limited Business Entity Person of a
Business Entity that owns a Street Hail Livery Base with which such applicant
is seeking to affiliate, to appear before the Commission as a representative of
such applicant. The scope of such representation is limited to business
transactions related to licensing and transfers of vehicle affiliations with a
Street Hail Livery License, and excludes transactions for the initial purchase
of a Street Hail Livery License or transfer of ownership of or interests in a
Street Hail Livery License.
(Added City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 59B-05 Licensing – Special Requirements for Livery Base Stations and Street
Hail Livery Bases.
   (a)   Fitness to Hold a License.
      (1)   An Applicant for a License to operate a Livery Base Station must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the Applicant is fit to
operate a Base Station.
      (2)   The Commission will consider:
         (i)   The ability of the Applicant to adequately manage the Base
Station,
         (ii)   The Applicant's financial stability,
         (iii)   Whether the Applicant operates or has previously operated a
Licensed Base Station and the manner in which that Base Station was operated.
      (3)   The Commission will also consider any relevant information
maintained in the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles or the
Commission.
   (b)   Off-Street Parking. An Applicant for a License to operate a Livery
Base Station must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the
operator of the Base Station will comply with the provision to provide and use
lawful off-street facilities as described in 35 RCNY §
59B-15(j).
   (c)   Local Review. A determination by the Commission to approve an
application for a new or renewal License to operate a Livery Base Station will
not become final until the determination has been subject to review by the New
York City Council, as follows:
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a new or renewal Livery Base
Station License, the Commission will, within five business days, submit a copy
of the application to the City Council and to the district office of the City
Council member and the community board for the area in which the Base Station
is or would be located.
      (2)   Within five days of a decision to approve a new or renewal Base
Station License, the Commission will send to the City Council and to the
district office of the Council member within whose district that Base Station
is or would be located:
         (i)   A written copy of the approval decision.
         (ii)   Copies of the data, information, and other materials the
Commission relied on to make the decision.
      (3)   Action by City Council. [Administrative Code § 19-511.1]
         (i)   Within 90 days of the first scheduled meeting following receipt
of the decision and back-up data, the Council can adopt a resolution to review
the decision and can approve or disapprove it.
         (ii)   If the Council fails to act within the 90-day period, the
Commission's decision will become final.
   (d)   Submit Business Plan – Livery Base Only. A Livery Base Station must
submit a business plan with each application for a new or renewal License or
for a change of ownership of the Base Station License. The business plan must
include:
      (1)   Contact Information. The business name, address, telephone number,
email address and 24-hour contact number for the Base Station;
      (2)   Plans for Ensuring Compliance with Commission Rules.
         (i)   A general description of how the Base Station intends to monitor
and ensure that the Base Station itself, its affiliated Vehicle Owners, and the
Drivers operating the affiliated Vehicles comply with these Rules;
         (ii)   A specific plan for assuring that affiliated Vehicles and their
Drivers provide transportation only through pre-arrangement made with the Base
         (iii)   A specific description of how the Base plans to prevent its
affiliated Vehicles and their Drivers from accepting street hails
      (3)   Plans for Preventing Recurrence of Past Violations. A description
of how the Base Station intends to prevent a recurrence of any Rule violations
that occurred during the current and previous (if any) term(s) of its License.
      (4)   Off-Street Parking. Policies and procedures regarding off-street
parking, including:
         (i)   The address of the Livery Base's off-street parking location
         (ii)   How far the off-street parking location is from the Livery
Base.
         (iii)   How the Base will encourage its affiliated Vehicles to use the
Livery Base's off-street parking location, and
         (iv)   How the Livery Base will ensure that the affiliated Vehicles
not using the off-street parking location do not violate applicable traffic and
parking regulations when they are in the area around the Base Station.
      (5)   Number of Vehicles.
         (i)   Renewal Applicants must include the number of Vehicles currently
affiliated with the Base Station
         (ii)   New Applicants must include the number of Vehicles they expect
to be affiliated with the Base Station when it obtains the License
         (iii)   Both new and renewal Applicants must include an estimate of
the average number of Vehicles they expect to be affiliated with the Base
during the term of the License;
         (iv)   A Street Hail Livery Base can affiliate both Street Hail
Liveries and other For-Hire Vehicles if it is also a Base or Street Hail
Liveries and Paratransit Vehicles if it is a Paratransit Base.
      (6)   Number of Trips.
         (i)   A renewal Applicant must include the average number of requests
currently received and the average number of trips currently dispatched on a
daily basis.
         (ii)   A new Applicant must include an estimate of average number of
requests it expects to receive and the average number of trips it expects to
dispatch on a daily basis when it obtains the License.
         (iii)   Both new and renewal Applicants must include an estimate of
the average requests they expect to receive and the average number of trips
they expect to dispatch on a daily basis during the term of the License;
      (7)   Customer Service. A description of how calls will be answered,
rides dispatched, and complaints handled;
      (8)   Hours of Operation.
         (i)   The hours during which the Base will be providing
transportation,
         (ii)   The hours the Base office will be open;
      (9)   Rates. A Rate Schedule in a form and format approved by the
Chairperson, including, for a Street Hail Livery Base, rates applicable to
Street Hail Liveries when dispatched on a Pre-Arranged Trip; provided that a
Street Hail Livery Base doing no pre-arranged business is not required to file
a Rate Schedule.
      (10)   Miscellaneous. Any other matters required by the Chairperson or
the Commission as a condition of renewal of a Base Station License in light of
the specifics of the Base Station's application and operating history.
§ 59B-06 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New Base License Term.
      (1)   The term of a new For-Hire Base License will expire three years
after the last day of the month in which the new License is issued.
      (2)   Example:
         (i)   A new Applicant files on October 10, 2009.
         (ii)   The Commission approves the application on December 15, 2009.
         (iii)   No action is taken by the City Council within its 90-day
period (by March 15, 2010), and the Commission issues a License on March 24,
2010.
         (iv)   That License would expire on March 30, 2013.
   (b)   Base License Renewal Term.
      (1)   A License issued to a renewing Applicant on or after July 2, 2009
will expire three years after the date on which the previous License expired.
      (2)   A License issued prior to July 2, 2009 will expire two years after
the date on which the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (d)   Extensions.
      (1)   If a timely application for renewal of a License has been made as
required in subdivision (c), above, the Chairperson will extend the
effectiveness of the License until review of the renewal application is
completed.
      (2)   The effectiveness of the License during this extended period
applies even if the application is ultimately denied.
      (3)   If an extended License renewal application is approved, the renewal
License expiration date will be based on the original expiration date of the
License and not the extended date.
   (e)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
      (3)   The suspended Base License holder must notify all vehicle owners
that are affiliated with the suspended Base of the suspension within five days
of the imposition of that suspension.
   (f)   Street Hail Livery Base Licenses.
      (1)   Suspension, Revocation, or Failure to Renew. If an underlying Base
License or Paratransit Base License or Commuter Van Service Authorization is
suspended or revoked as a result of the imposition of a penalty under this or
another Chapter of these Rules, or if the underlying License fails to be
renewed for any reason, the suspension, revocation or failure to renew is also
applicable to the Street Hail Livery Base License.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base License will expire three years after the
date it was issued or earlier if it, or the underlying Base License or
Paratransit Base License or Commuter Van Service Authorization, is revoked or
surrendered or is not renewed.
      (3)   Upon issuance of a Street Hail Livery Base License:
         (i)   the underlying Base License or Paratransit Base License term
will be pro-rated (and the License fee for that License will be pro-rated which
means an additional fee will be charged) so that the Base License will expire
on the same date that the Street Hail Livery Base License expires. Example. The
underlying Base License expires on 6/15/14. A Street Hail Livery Base License
is issued to the Base on 6/16/12 and will expire on 6/15/15. The underlying
Base License will be extended for one year and an additional 1 year license fee
of $500 will be charged. The underlying Base License and the Street Hail Livery
Base License will both expire on 6/15/15.
   (g)   Exception. This section shall not apply to High-Volume For-Hire
Services. The License term for High-Volume For-Hire Services is specified in 35
RCNY §
59D-06.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-07 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Base License Fee.
      (1)   The fee for the operation of a For-Hire Base is $500 annually.
      (2)   Exception: The fee for the operation of a Street Hail Livery Base
is $1,000 annually for the Street Hail Livery Base License plus $500 annually
for the fee for a For-Hire Base License or Paratransit Base License or $275 for
a Commuter Van Service Authorization.
      (3)   Upon issuance of a Street Hail Livery Base License:
         (i)   an underlying Base License term will be pro-rated (and the
License fee for that License will be pro-rated which means an additional fee
will be charged) so that the Base License will expire on the same date that the
Street Hail Livery Base License expires.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies the application.
   (d)   Base License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge a fee of $25
for each replacement License.
   (e)   Base Transfer Fee. The fee for the transfer of a Base License or
Ownership interest will be $500.
   (f)   Name Change Fee. The fee to change the name of a Base will be $500.
   (g)   Relocation Fee. The fee to change the location of a Base will be $500.
   (h)   Exception. This section shall not apply to High-Volume For-Hire
Services. The License fee for High-Volume For-Hire Services is specified in 35
RCNY §
59D-07.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-08 Licensing – Causes for Denial or Revocation.
   (a)   Material Misrepresentation.
      (1)   The Commission can deny an application for a License or its renewal
and revoke or suspend any License issued if it finds that an Applicant has made
a material misstatement or misrepresentation on an application for a License or
its renewal.
      (2)   The Commission must send notice and conduct a hearing before
revoking or suspending any License already issued.
   (b)   Violation of NYS Franchise Act.
      (1)   The Commission will not grant a License or renew a License when the
base owner is offering and selling franchises in violation of the New York
Franchise Sales Act (for the purposes of this subdivision, "Act").
      (2)   The Commission can also suspend or revoke the License of any Base
Owner found to have violated the Act.
      (3)   In determining whether a Base Owner is in violation of the Act, the
Commission can rely upon the written advice of the New York State Department of
Law certifying to the Commission that the Base Owner is in violation of the
Act.
   (c)   In determining whether a Base Owner is in violation of the Act, the
Commission can rely upon the written advice of the New York State Department of
Law certifying to the Commission that the Base Owner is in violation of the
Act.
   (d)   Livery Base Station-Criteria for Reviewing New Application. In
reviewing an application for a License to operate a Livery Base Station, the
Commission will examine and consider the following factors:
      (1)   Any negative impact on Other Transportation Systems, including:
         (i)   The adequacy of existing mass transit and mass transportation
facilities to meet the transportation needs of the public
         (ii)   Any negative impact that the proposed operation might have on
those existing services
         (iii)   The extent and quality of service provided by existing,
legally operating For-Hire Vehicles and Taxicabs
      (2)   Any negative impact on quality of life in the vicinity of the Base
Station, including: (i) Traffic congestion
         (ii)   Sidewalk congestion
         (iii)   Noise.
   (e)   Livery Base Station – Compliance with Rules.
      (1)   In reviewing an application to renew a Base Station License, the
Commission will consider whether the Licensee has violated any applicable Rule
of the Commission.
      (2)   No Livery Base Station will be renewed if the Applicant has been
found guilty of violating the off-street parking requirements described in 35
RCNY §
59B-15(j).
   (f)   Revocation for Livery Fund violations.
      (1)   No Livery Base Station License will be issued to an Applicant if a
Livery Base Station License previously held by Applicant was revoked for
violations of Article 6-G of the NYS Executive Law.
      (2)   A Livery Base Station License previously held by an Applicant
includes any Livery Base Station License held by any Licensee in which any of
Applicant's Limited Business Entity Persons was also a Limited Business Entity
Person.
      (3)   The ban on issuance will continue for five years following the
revocation, and until
         (i)   Any money owed to the Livery Fund on the account of the revoked
License is paid or
         (ii)   The Livery Fund agrees on a payment plan for money owed to it.
   (g)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new Black Car Base
or Luxury Limousine Base License if the Applicant has not completed all the
requirements of an application within 90 days of the date the application is
filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal Black Car
Base or Luxury Limousine Base License if the Applicant has not completed all
the requirements of an application by the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new or renewal
Livery Base Station License if the Applicant has not completed all the
requirements of an application and has not completed all the requirements for
Licensing as a Livery Base Station set forth in 35 RCNY §
59B-05 within 90 days of Commission approval of the application.
      (4)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (h)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License to operate a Base Station, the Chairperson may seek
additional information from the Applicant. This request for additional
information may be an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or
other method of communication. This additional consideration may result in the
denial of the application. Failure to provide any requested information within
the time frame requested, or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will
result in a denial of the application.
§ 59B-09 Licensing – Transfer of an Ownership Interest in a For Hire Base
License.
   (a)   Transfer Requirements for All For-Hire Bases. Any For-Hire Base
License or Ownership interest in the Licensee can be transferred to a proposed
transferee if all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The transferee demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Commission
the qualifications to assume the duties and obligations of a Base Owner.
      (2)   All the outstanding fines, penalties, and other liabilities that
the transferor owes to the Commission have been satisfied.
      (3)   The Commission approves the transfer and any changes in corporate
officers or directors.
      (4)   Both the transferor and transferee must appear in person as
directed by the Chairperson to complete the transfer:
         (i)   A party who is an individual must appear in person
         (ii)   A party that is a partnership must be represented by a general
partner
         (iii)   A party that is a corporation must be represented by a Limited
Business Entity Person.
      (5)   No transfer or change will be effective until approved and the
Chairperson has given notice of the approval to the Licensee.
   (b)   Additional Requirements for Transfers of a Livery Base Station.
      (1)   Additional Bond for Tort Liabilities. The transferor or the
transferee files an additional bond to cover the transferor's tort liabilities
(if any) that have arisen out of the operation of a Base Station, that remain
outstanding and that exceed the amount covered by any bond or insurance policy
already in effect.
      (2)   Transferee Business Plan. The transferee provides a business plan
meeting the requirements in 35 RCNY §
59B-05(d) above.
      (3)   Transfer While Judgment Pending. No voluntary transfer of a Base
Station License can be made if a judgment docketed with the clerk of court of
any county within the City of New York remains unsatisfied against the Licensee
and in favor of any Government agency. However, the transfer can be permitted
under one of the following conditions:
         (i)   A bond is filed in an amount sufficient to satisfy the judgment.
         (ii)   All the judgment creditors of a Licensee file written
permission for the transfer with the Commission.
         (iii)   The proceeds from the transfer are paid into court or held in
escrow, on terms and conditions approved by the Commission, to protect the
rights of all parties that have a legitimate interest.
      (4)   Criteria for Approving Proposed Transferee. In reviewing a proposed
transfer of a Base Station License or of the ownership interest in the License,
the Commission will consider the following:
         (i)   The criminal history of the proposed transferee and of the
transferee's Business Entity Persons, if any
         (ii)   Any relevant information maintained in the records of the DMV
or the Commission
         (iii)   The transferee's financial stability
      (5)   Criteria for Denying Proposed Transferee. A transfer will not be
approved if, in the past two years, the proposed transferee or any Business
Entity Person of the proposed transferee, where appropriate, has been found to
have violated any law or rule involving any of the following:
         (i)   Assault of a Passenger, official, or member of the public in
connection with any matter relating to a For-Hire Vehicle
         (ii)   Giving or offering an unlawful gratuity to a public servant, as
defined in § 10.00 of the NYS Penal Law
         (iii)   Providing the Commission with false information
         (iv)   Three unexplained failures to respond to an official
communication from the Commission or the Department of Investigation that was
sent by certified mail, return receipt requested
   (c)   Street Hail Livery Base Licenses Not Transferrable.
      (1)   Street Hail Livery Base Licenses can only be used in connection
with the specific entity to which they were initially issued (i.e. the specific
Livery Base to which the Street Hail Livery Base License was initially issued)
and cannot be transferred for use by any other entity.
      (2)   A change in the ownership structure of or an ownership interest in
an owner of a Street Hail Livery Base License is valid only if the conditions
of 35 RCNY §
59B-09(a) are met.
§ 59B-10 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
[Reserved.]
§ 59B-11 Compliance with Law – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Base License Required. No person or entity is permitted to operate a
business as a Livery Base Station, Black Car Base or Luxury Limousine Base
without a Valid For-Hire Base License from the Commission. No person or entity
is permitted to operate a business as a Street Hail Livery Base without a Valid
Street Hail Livery Base License from the Commission.
 
            Fine: $200 - $1,500
35 RCNY §  Penalty Point: 1                             Appearance REQUIRED
59B-11(a)   Administrative Code Penalties for Unlicensed
            Activity
 
   (b)   For-Hire Vehicle License and Commission License Plate.
      (1)   A Base Owner must not dispatch any For-Hire Vehicle unless:
         (i)   A Vehicle registered in NYS has license plates embossed with the
legend "T & LC"
         (ii)   A Vehicle registered in a state other than New York has
complied with any applicable license plate requirements.
         (iii)   The vehicle has a Valid For-Hire Vehicle License.
      (2)   The Commission will post a list of Validly Licensed For-Hire
Vehicles on its Web site.
      (3)   In addition to the other requirements of this Rule, a Street Hail
Livery Base Owner must not dispatch a vehicle to engage in the business of
being a Street Hail Livery unless the vehicle has a Valid Street Hail Livery
License.
 
            Base Owner Fine: $300
35 RCNY §  Penalty Points: 1                 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-11(b)   Administrative Code Penalties for
            Unlicensed Activity
 
   (c)   Valid TLC Driver License Required. 
      (1)   A Base Owner must not dispatch any Vehicle unless its driver
possesses a Valid TLC Drives License.
      (2)   The Commission will post on its Web site a list of Drivers holding
Valid TLC Driver Licenses.
      (3)   In addition to the other requirements of this Rule, a Street Hail
Livery Base Owner must not dispatch a Vehicle to engage in the business of
being a Street Hail Livery unless the Driver possesses a Valid TLC Driver
License or, in the event the Vehicle is an Accessible Street Hail Livery, a
Valid License to operate a Paratransit Vehicle.
 
            Base Fine: $500 for the first violation in
35 RCNY §  12 months;                                 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-11(c)   $800 for each subsequent offense within a
            12-month period
 
   (d)   Valid Chauffeur's License Required.
      (1)   A Base Owner must not dispatch any Vehicle unless it is being
driven by a Driver with a Valid Chauffeur's License.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner is responsible for knowing the status of the state-
issued driver's license for any Driver dispatched in one of Owner's Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Base Fine: $500 except if the DMV status of
59B-11(d)   the driver's license is not available on    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            the Commission's website.
 
   (e)   Advertising of Unlicensed For-Hire Service. A base owner must not hold
him or herself out to the public as a for-hire service without a current
License issued by the Commission for that activity. "For-Hire" service includes
Livery, Black Car, High-Volume For-Hire or Luxury Limousine service.
 
            Fine: $350 for the first violation;
35 RCNY §  $500 for the second violation;               Appearance REQUIRED
59B-11(e)   revocation for the third violation within 36
            months
 
   (f)   Unapproved Transfer of Base Location. A Base Owner who moves a Base to
any location without the prior approval of the Commission is engaging in
Unlicensed Activity.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $1,500 and Suspension of Base
59B-11(f)   License until compliance                   Appearance REQUIRED
            Penalty Point: 1
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 59B-12 Compliance with Law – Workers' Compensation.
   (a)   Livery Base Station.
      (1)   Compliance with Workers' Compensation Law.
         (i)   Every Livery Base Station must either
            (A)   be a member of the Livery Fund or
            (B)   maintain coverage under the NYS Workers' Compensation Law for
all drivers dispatched.
         (ii)   Every Livery Base Station must maintain either Livery Fund
membership or workers' compensation insurance coverage at all times.
         (iii)   A Livery Base Station that is an Independent Base Station must
be a member of Livery Fund. To prove it is a member of the Livery Fund, a
Livery Base Station must submit to the Commission:
            (A)   A copy of the affirmation given by the Livery Base Station to
the Workers' Compensation Board as required by § 18-c(2) of the NYS Workers'
Compensation Law and
            (B)   A copy of any certificate of membership or similar
documentation issued by the Livery Fund.
         (iv)   A Livery Base Station that is not an Independent Base Station
must buy insurance providing compensation under the NYS Workers' Compensation
Law for all drivers dispatched. To prove that it has bought insurance coverage,
a Livery Base Station must submit to the Commission:
            (A)   a current certificate of insurance and
            (B)   proof that the insurer is licensed by the NYS Insurance
Department, together with a list of authorized signatories.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance up to
59B-12(a)(1) $5,000 and either suspension until compliance  Appearance REQUIRED
             or Livery Base License revocation.
 
      (2)   Audit of Independent Base Stations. The Commission can audit any
Independent Base Station as provided in § 18-c(2)(g) of the NYS Workers'
Compensation Law.
      (3)   Coercion Prohibited. An Independent Base Station must not coerce
any driver or vehicle owner into making false statements or refrain from
reporting any violation of Article 6-G of the NYS Executive Law.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 - $5,000 and or suspension of
59B-12(a)(3) Livery Base License and membership in Livery Appearance REQUIRED
             Fund for up to 2 years.
 
      (4)   Enforcement on Request. The Commission will enforce the provisions
of this paragraph (4) only at the request of the Livery Fund or the NYS
Workers' Compensation Board. The Livery Fund or NYS Workers' Compensation Board
can ask the Commission to enforce these rules by filing a complaint against a
Livery Base. The complaint will include documentation of the violation.
         (i)   An Independent Base Station must pay any assessment by the
Livery Fund within 30 days of the assessment.
 
                Fine: $500 for each 30 days after notice
                payment is overdue, plus payment of the
35 RCNY §      overdue amount plus interest on such amount Appearance REQUIRED
59B-12(a)(4)(i) at 12% per annum, together with either
                suspension until compliance or revocation
                of license and Livery Fund membership.
 
         (ii)   If an Independent Base Station License is suspended or revoked
for failure to pay an assessment, the License cannot be reinstated, and the
Independent Base Station cannot apply for a new or renewal license until:
            (A)   The Independent Base Station pays any money it owes to the
Livery Fund or
            (B)   The Livery Fund agrees on a payment plan for money owed to
it.
         (iii)   An Independent Base Station must not make a materially false
statement in the sworn affirmation required by § 18-c(2) of the Workers'
Compensation Law.
 
                  Fine: $1,000 - $10,000 and/or Livery Base
35 RCNY §        License revocation for up to 5 years for  Appearance REQUIRED
59B-12(a)(4)(iii) first offense and permanent bar to
                  licensure for second.
 
         (iv)   Any Independent Base Station found to have made a materially
false statement under (iii) of this subparagraph on two separate occasions may
not apply for or hold a Livery Base Station License.
         (v)   An Independent Base Station must not make any material
misrepresentation about:
            (A)   the number of Vehicles affiliated with the Independent Base
Station,
            (B)   the number of owners of such Vehicles, or
            (C)   the number of drivers dispatched by the Independent Base
Station.
            (D)   Material misrepresentation includes any temporary alteration
of records to reduce the numbers of vehicles or drivers.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $1,000 - $5,000 and/or Livery Base
59B-12(a)(4)(v) License suspension or Livery Base License Appearance REQUIRED
                revocation for up to 2 years.
 
      (5)   Cessation of Benefits to Drivers. Upon filing with the Workers'
Compensation Board to end the payment of benefits to the Driver of an
affiliated Vehicle who has recovered from a disability and is ready to return
to work, a Base Owner must provide the Driver with documentation that benefits
have been stopped in order for the Commission to return that Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-12(a)(5)
 
   (b)   Black Car Bases, Luxury Limousine Bases, and High-Volume For-Hire
Services. 
      (1)   Membership in the Black Car Operators' Injury Compensation Fund.
         (i)   Every Black Car Base, Luxury Limousine Base, and High-Volume
For-Hire Service must become and remain a member of the Black Car Fund and must
register with the Department of State as a Member of the Black Car Fund.
         (ii)   This provision does not apply to a Black Car or Luxury
Limousine Base that owns fifty (50%) percent or more of the Vehicles it
dispatches.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance, to a
59B-12(b)(1) maximum of $10,000, and either suspension      Appearance REQUIRED
             until compliance or Base License revocation
 
      (2)   Submit Certificate of Registration with the Fund. Every Black Car
Base, Luxury Limousine Base, and High-Volume For-Hire Service must:
         (i)   Provide the Commission with a copy of its certificate of
registration with the Black Car Fund.
         (ii)   Pay to the Department of State all fees due as required by
State law.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance, to a
59B-12(b)(2) maximum of $10,000, and either suspension      Appearance REQUIRED
             until compliance or Base License revocation
 
      (3)   Bill and Collect Surcharge. Every Black Car Base, Luxury Limousine
Base, and High-Volume For-Hire Service member of the Black Car Fund must, for
every trip dispatched from that Base, bill and collect the surcharge
established by the Black Car Fund and required by State law in the manner
prescribed by the Black Car Fund and State law.
 
             Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance, to a
35 RCNY §   maximum of $10,000, and either suspension
59B-12(b)(3) until compliance or Base License revocation,   Appearance REQUIRED
             together with revocation of Black Car Fund
             membership
 
      (4)   Remit Surcharges. Every Black Car Base, Luxury Limousine Base, and
High-Volume For-Hire Service must forward to the Black Car Fund all surcharges
due and owing under paragraph (3), above, no later than the 15th day of the
month following the month in which the surcharge is collected.
 
             Fine: $500 - $5,000 for each 20 days the
             payment is overdue, and suspension until
35 RCNY §   compliance or revocation, together with
59B-12(b)(4) restitution to the Black Car Fund of any     Appearance REQUIRED
             unpaid amount, together with interest at the
             rate of 12 percent per annum, together with
             revocation of Black Car Fund membership.
 
      (5)   Comply with all Rules of the Black Car Fund. Every Black Car Base,
Luxury Limousine Base, and High-Volume For-Hire Service must comply with all
applicable provisions of law governing the Black Car Fund, and all rules and
regulations.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 - $10,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59B-12(b)(5) compliance or revocation
 
      (6)   Enforcement at Black Car Fund's Request. The Black Car Fund can ask
the Commission to enforce these rules by filing a complaint against a Black Car
Base, Luxury Limousine Base, or High-Volume For-Hire Service. The complaint
will include documentation of the violation.
   (c)   Street Hail Livery Bases.
      (1)   Every Street Hail Livery Base must comply with the NYS Workers'
Compensation Law and maintain the coverage required.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-13 Compliance with Law – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery Prohibited.
      (1)   Appearance of Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not offer or
give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or
member of the Commission, or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: Revocation and $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Demand for Gratuity. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any
employee, representative, or member of the Commission or any other public
servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 up to Revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(a)(2)
 
      (3)   Prohibited Offer of Gift to Airport or Transportation Terminal
Staff. A Licensee must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing of value
to a person or persons employed at any airport or other transportation terminal
to provide ground transportation information services, dispatching service,
security services, traffic and parking control, or baggage handling.
 
35 RCNY §   Base Fine: $1,000 up to revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(a)(3)
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert
with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(b)   days or revocation
 
   (c)   Deliberate Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(c)   days or revocation
 
   (d)   Deliberate Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(d)   days or revocation
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(e)   days
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(f)   days or revocation
 
   (g)   No Threat or Harm to Service Animal. A Licensee must not distract,
harm, or use physical force against or attempt to distract, harm, or use
physical force against a Service Animal accompanying a person with a
disability.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(g)   days or revocation
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission within 15 calendar days after
any felony conviction of the Licensee or of any of Licensee's officers or
members.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-13(h)
 
         (i)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Licensee must
cooperate with all law enforcement officers and all authorized representatives
of the Commission. Cooperation includes, but is not limited to, responding to a
request for the Licensee's name, License number, and any documents Licensee is
required to have in his or her possession.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(i)
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Licensee must truthfully answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives.
      (2)   Within five business days following a request from the Commission,
a Licensee must produce any Licenses or other documents the Licensee is
required to have.
      (3)   Licensee must aid the Commission in obtaining information it seeks
regarding Drivers or Vehicles affiliated with the Base.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(j)(1)-(3)
 
      (4)   Within 48 hours, a Licensee must respond to any contact from the
Commission, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-13(j)(4)
 
   (k)   Courtesy. A Licensee must be courteous to Passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-13(k)
 
   (l)   MTA Tax.
      (1)   The MTA Tax must be charged on any Hail Trip in a Street Hail
Livery that starts in New York City and ends in any of the following:
         (i)   New York City
         (ii)   Dutchess County
         (iii)   Nassau County
         (iv)   Orange County
         (v)   Putnam County
         (vi)   Rockland County
         (vii)   Suffolk County
         (viii)   Westchester County
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base must ensure that the Taximeter in each
Street Hail Livery affiliated with the Base is adjusted to properly collect the
MTA Tax for Hail Trips.
      (3)   A Street Hail Livery Base must collect the MTA Tax due for each
Hail Trip made by a Street Hail Livery affiliated with that Base from the
Driver of the Street Hail Livery.
      (4)   A Street Hail Livery Base must remit all MTA Taxes due to the NYS
Department of Taxation and Finance together with such returns as are required
by NYS Department of Taxation and Finance as and when such taxes are due.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 per vehicle and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59B-13(l)   compliance
 
   (m)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-13(m)
 
   (n)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A For-Hire Base must not retaliate against any Driver or Vehicle
owner for making a good faith complaint against any Base.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or Vehicle owner or
withholding or withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the
Driver or Vehicle owner.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  or vehicle owner for losses for the first
59B-13(n)   violation and a fine of $10,000 plus        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            restitution to the driver or vehicle owner
            for the second violation within five years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; amended City Record 12/11/
2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 59B-14 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Alcohol and Drug Laws. A Base Owner must not knowingly allow an
affiliated For-Hire Vehicle to be operated by a Driver who is under the
influence of any drugs or alcohol or whose driving ability is in any way
impaired.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59B-14(a)
 
   (b)   Disability Laws.
      (1)   A Base Owner must not instruct, authorize, or permit an affiliated
Driver to discriminate unlawfully against people with disabilities.
      (2)   Discrimination includes:
         (i)   Refusing to serve People with Disabilities,
         (ii)   Refusing to load and unload the mobility aids of People with
Disabilities,
         (iii)   Charge any more than the set rate for the transportation of
People with Disabilities, or their Service Animals, wheelchairs, or other
mobility aids.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-14(b)   days or revocation
 
§ 59B-15 Operations – Business Premises.
   (a)   Maintenance of Physical Location. A For-Hire Base Owner must maintain
a principal place of business in a commercially zoned area, from which
affiliated Vehicles and Drivers can be dispatched.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until requirement is met. Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(a)
 
   (b)   Minimum Number of Affiliated Vehicles.
      (1)   A Base must have at least ten affiliated Vehicles associated with
the Base except when either of the following applies:
         (i)   A Base that was first Licensed before January 1, 1988 will only
be required to have at least five affiliated Vehicles.
         (ii)   A Livery Base that has an affiliated Accessible Vehicle is only
required to have at least five affiliated Vehicles.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base can meet the requirement of paragraph (1)
by affiliating either or both of Street Hail Liveries or other licensed For-
Hire Vehicles or, if the Base is also a Paratransit Base, Paratransit Vehicles
and Street Hail Liveries.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until minimum is met Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(b)
 
   (c)   Working Phone at the Base. A Base Owner must maintain a working
telephone at the Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(c)
 
   (d)   Dispatching of Vehicles from Base.
      (1)   A Base Station Owner must provide a device for transmitting trip
request information to Drivers of affiliated Vehicles.
      (2)   Except for Accessible Vehicles, no For-Hire Vehicle can be
dispatched from any location other than the location specified in the Base
License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(d)
 
   (e)   Application to Move Base.
      (1)   A Base Owner who moves the Base to a new location must apply for
approval of the new location by the Commission.
      (2)   The proposed location must comply with all of the requirements for
obtaining the particular Base License sought; except that if there has been no
change in the Ownership of the Base, the Commission can waive the requirements
for:
         (i)   Proving fitness to hold License and
         (ii)   Posting a bond.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension of Base License. Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(e)
 
   (f)   Application to Transfer or Assign Base. A Base Owner must not transfer
or assign the Base Owner's License to another without obtaining the
Commission's written approval as described in 35 RCNY §
59B-09. Note: A Street Hail Livery Base License cannot be transferred.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension of Base License. Appearance REQUIRED
59B-15(f)
 
   (g)   Display Rates. A Base Owner must at all time conspicuously display the
current schedule of rates charged by the Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-15(g)
 
   (h)   Display Base Information. A Base Owner must conspicuously display the
Base name, any trade, business or operating name, and the Base License number
on the front or office door of the Base's premises.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-15(h)
 
         (i)   Black Car Base Affiliation. Only Black Car Bases can dispatch
Vehicles to do line work and only For-Hire Vehicles that are affiliated with
Black Car Bases can perform line work.
 
            Fine: $250 for first violation             Appearance NOT REQUIRED
35 RCNY §  $500 for second violation within 24 months Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-15(i)   Revocation for third violation within 24   Appearance REQUIRED
            months
 
   (j)   Off-Street Parking Requirements – Livery Base Stations.
      (1)   A Base Station Owner must ensure that the operator of the Base
provides and uses legal, off-street facilities for parking and storing the
Livery Vehicles that will be dispatched from the Base.
      (2)   The available off-street facilities must provide at least one
parking space for every two Livery Vehicles (not including Street Hail
Liveries) affiliated with the Base.
      (3)   The distance between the Base and the off-street parking facilities
for Livery Vehicles must be one and one-half miles or less.
      (4)   The off-street parking facilities for Livery Vehicles must be in a
location zoned for the operation of a parking facility.
      (5)   Waiver. The Chairperson can reduce the number of required off-
street parking spaces or can waive that requirement entirely upon a
determination that:
         (i)   There are not enough legal off-street parking facilities in the
vicinity of the Base to fulfill these requirements,
         (ii)   An Applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Chairperson that complying with the off-street parking requirements in
paragraphs (1) and (2) would impose an economic hardship upon the Applicant.
         (iii)   The Chairperson will not reduce or waive the off-street
parking requirements where it has been determined in an administrative
proceeding that the Applicant, or a predecessor in interest, has violated any
provision governing the transfer of the Base.
         (iv)   The Commission's decision to waive or reduce the off-street
parking requirements:
            A.   Will be made in writing,
            B.   Will contain a detailed statement of the reasons for the
decision
            C.   Will be made a part of the Commission's approval of the
application for the Base Station License.
§ 59B-16 Operations – Special Requirements.
   (a)   Occupy Licensed Base Location. All Base Owners must operate the Base
on the premises licensed by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Revocation of License  
59B-16(a)
 
   (b)   Maintain Operations – Livery Base Only.
      (1)   A Livery Base Station Owner must not cease operations at the Base
Station for a period of 60 or more consecutive days.
      (2)   There will be no penalty if the failure to operate for 60 or more
days has been caused by strike, riot, war, public catastrophe or other acts
beyond the control of the Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Revocation of License  
59B-16(b)
 
   (c)   Use of Temporary Premises – Livery Base Only.
      (1)   Where the Commission finds that a particular Livery Base Station
cannot be operated due to an act beyond the control of the Licensee, a
temporary Base Station License will be issued to the same Licensee for an
alternative location, provided that all other requirements for such License are
met and provided further that the unexpired term of the original License is six
months or more.
      (2)   A temporary Base Station License will last no longer than 60 days.
      (3)   During the 60-day period, the Base Owner must either:
         (i)   File an application to change the Livery Base location or
         (ii)   Return operations to the original location and notify the
Chairperson of the return.
      (4)   The temporary Base Station License will not be extended unless
within the 60 day period the Base Station Owner either (1) files an application
to change the location and the Commission has not completed its review of the
application within the 60 day period or (2) demonstrates that good cause exists
for a further extension because the Owner requires additional time to return
the Base Station to the original location.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59B-16(c)
 
§ 59B-17 Operations – Service Requirements (Customers).
   (a)   Customer Complaints. A Base Owner will be responsible for handling
customer complaints when directed by the Chairperson and will provide any
information requested by the Chairperson regarding such complaints.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-17(a)
 
   (b)   No Required Ride-Sharing. A For-Hire Base Owner must not require that
any prospective Passenger share a ride with another prospective Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Base Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-17(b)
 
   (c)   Provide Accessible Transportation. A Base Owner must provide
transportation service to Persons with Disabilities.
      (1)   Requirements for Percentage of all Dispatched Trips Serviced by an
Accessible Vehicle: 
         (i)   At least five (5) percent of a Base's total trips dispatched
between July 1, 2018, and June 30, 2019 must be trips dispatched to and
completed by an Accessible Vehicle.
         (ii)   At least ten (10) percent of a Base's total trips dispatched
between July 1, 2019, and June 30, 2020 must be trips dispatched to and
completed by an Accessible Vehicle.
         (iii)   At least fifteen (15) percent of a Base's total trips
dispatched between July 1, 2020, and June 30, 2021 must be trips dispatched to
and completed by an Accessible Vehicle.
         (iv)   At least twenty (20) percent of a Base's total trips dispatched
between July 1, 2021, and June 30, 2022 must be trips dispatched to and
completed by an Accessible Vehicle.
         (v)   Beginning July 1, 2022, and continuing each year thereafter, at
least twenty-five (25) percent of a Base's total trips dispatched between the
dates of July 1 and June 30 must be trips dispatched to and completed by an
Accessible Vehicle.
      (2)   For purposes of paragraph (1) of this subdivision, Hail Trips
performed by an Accessible Street Hail Livery affiliated with a Base will count
toward the total number of trips dispatched by that Base.
 
             Fine: $50 for each 100 trips by which the Base
             missed the percentage of trips it was required
             to dispatch to Accessible Vehicles in that
             calendar year.

             Example: If Base A dispatches 100,000 trips
             between July 1, 2018 and June 30, 2019, but
35 RCNY §   only dispatches 2,500 trips to Accessible
59B-17(c)(1) Vehicles, the base will have missed the 5%     Appearance REQUIRED
             requirement by 2,500 trips and be subject to a
             $1,250 fine.

             If a Base fails to dispatch enough trips to
             Accessible Vehicles to meet at least half of
             its percentage requirement, the Commission may
             seek suspension of up to 30 days or
             revocation.
 
      (3)   Evaluation by the Commission. Every year, beginning July 1, 2019,
the Commission will review Base compliance levels, service levels, and any
other information it deems relevant to determine if adjustments need to be made
to the percentages set forth in paragraph (1) of this subdivision.
      (4)   Must Provide "Equivalent Service." 
         (i)   The Base Owner must provide "equivalent service" to persons with
disabilities.
         (ii)   "Equivalent Service" means that the service available to
Persons with Disabilities, is equivalent to the service provided to other
individuals with respect to:
            A.   Response time to requests for service.
            B.   Fares charged.
            C.   Hours and days of service availability.
            D.   Ability to accept reservations.
            E.   Restrictions based on trip purpose.
            F.   Vehicle types offered.
            G.   Other limitations on capacity or service availability.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-17(c)(4)
 
   (d)   Must Dispatch Own Vehicles. A Base Owner must not dispatch a Vehicle
that is not affiliated with the Base Owner's Base unless the Base Owner
provides the customer with the name and license number of both the affiliated
Base and the dispatching Base (clearly identifying which Base is the affiliated
Base and which Base is the dispatching Base) in all communications with the
customer and any materials or receipts provided to the customer.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-17(d)
 
   (e)   Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries.
      (1)   Credit/Debit Card Rules.
         (i)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must ensure that each affiliated
Street Hail Livery is equipped to accept customer payment by credit and debit
card.
         (ii)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner is not permitted to charge a
pass along or additional fee to any passenger for debit or credit card
transactions in Hail Trips.
 
             Fine: First violation: $350 if plead guilty
             before a hearing; $500 if found guilty
             following a hearing.

             Second violation w/in 24 months: $700 if plead
35 RCNY §   guilty before a hearing; $1,000 and possible
59B-17(e)(1) suspension of License for up to 30 days if     Appearance REQUIRED
             found guilty following a hearing.

             Third violation w/in 36 months: $750 and
             Revocation of License if plead guilty before a
             hearing; $1,000 and Revocation of License if
             found guilty following a hearing.
 
      (2)   E-Z-Pass® Required. A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must ensure
that each affiliated Street Hail Livery is equipped with an E-Z-Pass® tag.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-17(e)(2)
 
   (f)   Exception to the Percentage of all Dispatched Trips Serviced by an
Accessible Vehicle Requirement. A Base currently licensed on the effective date
of this Subdivision (f) may opt to meet a response time requirement for
requests for Accessible Vehicles, in lieu of the requirements contained in 35
RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), if the Base meets the following requirements:
      (1)   A Base will be exempt from the requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) if it either:
         (i)   Is approved by the Commission as an Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher, responsible for receiving requests for Accessible Vehicles from
associated Bases with which it has entered into an agreement and dispatching
Accessible Vehicles on behalf of itself and its associated Bases in accordance
with the response time requirements contained in Paragraph (3) below, or
         (ii)   Associates with an approved Accessible Vehicle dispatcher by
entering into an agreement with an approved Accessible Vehicle dispatcher and
sending its requests for Accessible Vehicles to its associated Accessible
Vehicle dispatcher.
      (2)   Application Requirements to be an Approved Accessible Vehicle
Dispatcher. A Base applying to be approved as Accessible Vehicle dispatcher
must:
         (i)   Submit a list of at least ten (10) Bases, owned by an entity or
entities other than the owner(s) of the applicant Base, that have demonstrated
an intent to associate with the applicant Base,
         (ii)   Submit an outreach and marketing plan outlining the ways it
will inform passengers who use wheelchairs about its associated Bases'
wheelchair accessible offerings, subject to the approval of the Commission, and
         (iii)   Submit a statement outlining the number of Accessible Vehicles
it will be able to dispatch in the first three (3) and six (6) months following
its approval as an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, subject to the approval of
the Commission.
      (3)   Response Time Requirement for Requests for Accessible Vehicles for
Accessible Vehicle Dispatchers. 
         (i)   The Accessible Vehicle dispatcher must service at least ninety
percent (90%) of all the requests for Accessible Vehicles it receives in under
ten (10) minutes.
         (ii)   For purposes of (i), "requests" will not include requests for
Accessible Vehicles that were cancelled by the passenger within ten (10)
minutes of the request.
         (iii)   If an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher fails to meet the
requirements contained in (i) above, the Commission will notify the Accessible
Vehicle dispatcher and provide the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher thirty (30)
days to come into compliance with the stated response time requirement. Failure
to come into compliance within thirty (30) days of notification may result in
termination of the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher's approval, immediately
subjecting the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher to the requirements contained in
35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period.
      (4)   Calculating Response Time. For purposes of Paragraph (3) above,
response time will be calculated in the following manner:
         (i)   For trips arranged at least one hour in advance, response time
will be calculated from the time at which the vehicle was scheduled to arrive
at the passenger's pick-up location until the vehicle arrives at the
passenger's pick-up location.
         (ii)   For all other trip requests, response time will be calculated
from when the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher received the request until the
vehicle arrived at the passenger's pick-up location.
      (5)   Record Collection and Reporting Requirements for Accessible Vehicle
Dispatcher. In addition to the trip records an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher
must submit pursuant to its licensure as an FHV Base, an approved Accessible
Vehicle dispatcher must collect and transmit to the Commission within one week
of the end of each calendar month, in a format, layout, and procedure
prescribed by the Commission, the following records for each request for an
Accessible Vehicle the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher receives:
         (i)   the Base License Number of the Base that sent the request to the
Accessible Vehicle dispatcher,
         (ii)   the date and time that the request was received by the
Accessible Vehicle dispatcher,
         (iii)   the manner in which the request was received (e.g., via phone
call, smartphone app, website),
         (iv)   an indicator as to whether each request resulted in a completed
trip,
         (v)   if the request was fulfilled,
            A.   the TLC License number of the vehicle that fulfilled the
request, the Base to which the vehicle is affiliated, and the driver who
fulfilled the request
            B.   the pickup and drop off locations of the trip
            C.   the date and time the vehicle arrived at the pickup location,
and
            D.   the total passenger wait time, calculated pursuant to
Paragraph (4) above,
         (vi)   if the request was not fulfilled,
            A.   the date, time, and location of the requested pickup
            B.   the location of the requested drop off (if provided), and
            C.   an indicator as to the reason the request was not fulfilled,
such as passenger cancellation (including time of cancellation), passenger no-
show, driver cancellation, or no vehicles available. Failure to timely provide
trip records may result in termination of the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher's
approval, immediately subjecting the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher to the
requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period.
      (6)   Fares Charged to Passengers. An Accessible Vehicle dispatcher and
an associated Base cannot charge a passenger more for a trip request received
from an associated Base than that associated Base would charge a passenger
requesting a non-Accessible Vehicle for the same trip. Overcharging a passenger
may result in an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher or an associated Base being
immediately subject to the requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period.
      (7)   Passenger Feedback. Each Accessible Vehicle dispatcher and
associated Base must collect and transmit to the Commission within one week of
the end of each calendar month, in a format, layout, and procedure prescribed
by the Commission, all complaints and compliments the Base and Accessible
Vehicle dispatcher received from passengers in the preceding calendar month
concerning its provision of wheelchair accessible service, including all driver
ratings, where applicable.
      (8)   Bases opting to associate with an approved Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher must be able to accept requests from passengers for Accessible
Vehicles in the same manner(s) in which they accept requests from passengers
for non-Accessible Vehicles. Failure to accept requests from passengers for
Accessible Vehicles in the same manner(s) in which a base accepts requests from
passengers for non-Accessible Vehicles may result in the associated Base being
immediately subject to the requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period.
      (9)   In addition to submitting trip records pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-19, a Base opting to associate with an approved Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher, and Accessible Vehicle dispatchers in their capacity as a Base
which accepts trip requests, must submit to the Commission within one week of
the end of each calendar month, in a format, layout, and procedure approved by
the Commission, records containing the following information:
         (i)   For each request for an Accessible Vehicle received by the Base:
            A.   the date and time the Base received the request
            B.   the date and time the Base forwarded the request to its
Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, and
         (ii)   For each request for a non-Accessible Vehicle that results in a
completed trip
            A.   the date and time that the request was received by the Base,
            B.   an indicator corresponding to the trip record for the
completed trip provided pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-19,
         (iii)   All complaints and compliments received from passengers
concerning its provision of wheelchair accessible service, including all driver
ratings, where applicable.
      Failure to timely provide trip records may result in termination of the
Accessible Vehicle dispatcher's approval, immediately subjecting the base to
the requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period.
      (10)   Good Standing of Associated Bases. An associated Base must remain
in good standing with its Accessible Vehicle dispatcher. To remain in good
standing with its Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, an associated Base must adhere
to the terms of the agreement it entered into with its Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher. Failure to remain in good standing with its Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher may result in the associated Base being immediately subject to the
requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1), pro-rated for the duration of the compliance period, subject to
the conditions of Paragraph (12) below.
      (11)   Evaluation by the Commission. Every year, beginning July 1, 2019,
the Commission will review Base compliance levels, service levels, feedback
received pursuant to Paragraph (7) of this subdivision, and any other
information it deems relevant to determine if adjustments need to be made to
the response time requirements set forth in paragraph (3) of this subdivision
or any other requirement contained in this Subdivision (f). Any changes made to
the provisions of 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f), resulting from an annual review performed pursuant to this Paragraph
(11), will be subject to the City Administrative Procedure Act, Sections 1041 -
1047 of the Charter.
      (12)   Consequences of Termination of Approval. If the Commission
terminates a Base's associated Accessible Vehicle dispatcher's approval, or if
an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher terminates a Base's association, a Base
associated with the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher must:
         (i)   Associate with a different Accessible Vehicle dispatcher within
thirty (30) days following Commission provided notification of the Accessible
Vehicle dispatcher's approval termination, or
         (ii)   Submit an application to be approved as an Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher within thirty (30) days following the Commission provided
notification of the Accessible Vehicle dispatcher's termination.
      If a Base that is no longer associated with an Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher does not associate with a different approved Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher or submit an application to be approved as an Accessible Vehicle
dispatcher within thirty (30) days following notification of the termination,
the Base may be subject to the requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) on the thirty-first (31st) day following the notification.
      (13)   Base Accessible Service Selection Date. 
         (i)   A Base currently licensed on the effective date of Subdivision
(f) of these Rules must inform in the Commission, as provided below,whether it
is opting into the exception to 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f).
            A.   A Base opting into the exception provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f) as an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher must submit an application to be
approved as an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher within thirty (30) days of the
effective date of Subdivision (f).
            B.   A Base opting into the exception provided by 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f) must apply with an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher at the time the Base
exercises this option and must do so within sixty (60) days of the effective of
Subdivision (f).
            C.   A Base that does not opt into the exception to 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f), either as an approved Accessible Vehicle dispatcher or a Base
affiliating with an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, within the timeframes
provided by this subdivision may not apply to opt into such exception until the
Base's next renewal License application.
         (ii)   A renewing Base Applicant that had previously opted into the
exception to 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f) must indicate at the time of its renewal application whether it is
continuing to opt into the exception to 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f).
         (iii)   A Base that previously opted into the exception to 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) provided by this 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f), but failed to comply with the requirements of 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f) and is now subject to the requirements in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c)(1) may not reapply to opt into the exception provided by 35 RCNY §
59B-17(f) except for good cause shown.
(Amended City Record 12/20/2017, eff. 1/19/2018; amended City Record 10/12/
2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 8/12/2019, eff. 8/12/2019; amended
City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59B-18 Operations – Owners' Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Create and Enforce Good Conduct Rules.
      (1)   A Base Owner must create, maintain and enforce rules governing the
conduct of affiliated Drivers while performing their duty as For-Hire Vehicle
Drivers.
      (2)   These rules must be submitted in writing to the Commission within
seven days of their creation (not including holidays and weekends) and whenever
these rules are updated or amended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $100 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(a)
 
   (b)   Rules for Conduct in Area Surrounding the Base.
      (1)   A Base Owner will be responsible for ensuring that all "Base
personnel" comply with the restrictions established in this subsection (b)
within the "restricted area."
      (2)   For the purposes of this subdivision, "Base personnel" are the
Owners of Vehicles affiliated with the Base or dispatched by the Base and their
Drivers, whether they are on duty or not.
      (3)   For the purposes of this subdivision, "restricted area" is defined
as all public streets and sidewalks located on either side of the Base's street
or within the city block front where the Base is located, including both sides
of the street on which the Base is located.
      (4)   In the "restricted area," "Base personnel" must not do any of the
following:
         (i)   Double park.
         (ii)   Park on the sidewalk.
         (iii)   Park across a driveway.
         (iv)   Park by or at a fire hydrant or bus stop.
         (v)   Park, stop, or stand in any manner that violates the Vehicle and
Traffic Laws of the State of New York and the New York City Traffic Rules.
         (vi)   Do mechanical maintenance or make repairs on any Vehicle,
except to emergency repairs that are necessary to move a disabled Vehicle
(Examples of disabling conditions: a dead battery or a flat tire).
 
                 Fine: $50 for first occasion; $100 - $250
35 RCNY §       for the second and subsequent occasions;   Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(b)(1)-(4) non-renewal of Base License for violations
                 on six dates within 12 months
 
      (5)   A Base Owner must ensure that "Base personnel" obey all applicable
traffic and parking regulations within the "restricted area".
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(b)(5)
 
      (6)   A Base Owner must ensure that "Base personnel" do not create a
nuisance such as engaging in unnecessary horn honking, littering, or playing
loud audio material within the "restricted area".
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(b)(6)
 
   (c)   Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries: Credit Cards for Hail
Trips.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner can deduct from any credit or debit
card payments due to a Street Hail Livery Driver any amounts required to be
collected for payment of the MTA Tax.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must pay the Street Hail Livery
Driver on no less than a weekly basis, the total amount of all credit card
payments received during that period. The Base Owner must provide an itemized
receipt, showing all deductions, with each payment.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-18(c)(2)
 
      (3)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner can withhold from the cash payments
to a Street Hail Livery Driver (and all such withholdings must be identified on
the receipt) the following:
         (i)   the sum of all MTA Tax payments due from the Street Hail Livery
Driver; and
         (ii)   the sum of all tolls and charges deducted by the MTA Bridges &
Tunnels from the E-Z-Pass® account of the Street Hail Livery Base Owner for
trips provided by the Street Hail Livery Driver.
 
             Fine: First violation: $200
             Second violation: $300
35 RCNY §   Third violation: $500
59B-18(c)(3) In addition to the penalty payable to the      Appearance REQUIRED
             Commission, the ALJ may order the Base Owner
             to pay restitution to the Driver, equal to the
             excess amount that was charged to the Driver.
 
   (d)   A Base is permitted to penalize a Driver who does not pick up a
Passenger for a pre-arranged trip.
   (e)   Limits on Hours of Driving. 
      (i)   Generally. A Base or Associated Base must not dispatch a Driver to
transport any Passenger(s) for hire in excess of the daily and weekly limits
detailed in this subdivision.
         A.   Daily and weekly driving hours will be calculated by adding up
the time that passengers are being transported for hire. Time between trips
will not be counted as driving hours.
         B.   If any time exceeds the daily limit and serves as the basis for a
violation of the daily limit, such time cannot also be counted toward a
violation of the weekly limit.
         C.   It is a defense to a violation of the limits set forth in this
subdivision that any such limit was exceeded because of a single trip that
began before the limit was reached.
      (ii)   Daily Limit. A Base or Associated Base must not dispatch a Driver
to transport any Passenger(s) for hire in more than 10 hours in total in any
24-hour period. Exception: If a Base or Associated Base does not dispatch a
Driver to transport Passengers in at least eight consecutive hours, the 10-hour
count resets and such Base or Associated Base can resume dispatching such
Driver to pick up Passengers for hire.
 
35 RCNY §    Fine: $200 for each dispatch over the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-18(e)(ii) limit
 
      (iii)   Weekly Limit. A Base or Associated Base must not dispatch a
Driver to transport any Passenger(s) for hire in more than 60 hours in total in
any seven-day period that begins on Monday and ends on Sunday.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $200 for each dispatch over the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-18(e)(iii) limit
 
   (f)   Base Agreements. 
      (1)   Agreements Must Include All Terms. Any terms or conditions a Driver
or Vehicle owner must accept or agree to in order to receive a dispatch from a
For-Hire Base, any terms or conditions a Driver or Vehicle owner must accept or
agree to in order to receive payment from a For-Hire Base or the entity
designated by the For-Hire Base to process and disburse payments to Drivers and
Vehicle owners, any costs a Driver or a Vehicle owner must pay a For-Hire Base,
and any formulas used by a Base to calculate Driver or Vehicle owner earnings
must be included in a Base Agreement that complies with the provisions of this
subdivision.
         (i)   Written records required under this subdivision may be
maintained in hard copy or electronically.
 
             Fine: First violation: $500;
             Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 and/
             or suspension for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §   In addition to the penalty payable to the
59B-18(f)(1) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order the Appearance REQUIRED
             Base to pay restitution to the Driver or
             Vehicle owner, equal to the amount charged to
             the Driver or Vehicle owner in violation of
             this rule.
 
      (2)   Base Agreement Must be in Writing. 
         (i)*   All Base Agreements, including any amendments, must be in
writing and signed by the Base and the Driver or Vehicle owner. Electronic
signatures are permissible for electronic Base Agreements.
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as (i).
         (i)*   A copy of the fully executed Base Agreement must be provided to
the Driver and/or Vehicle owner and be made available on-demand at the Driver's
and/or Vehicle Owner's request.
* Editor's note: there are two subsections designated as (i).
         (ii)   A Base Owner must ensure that all Base Agreements are
maintained in accordance with Paragraph (6) of this subdivision and made
available for inspection by Commission representatives during regular business
hours.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(2)(i)-(ii)
 
         (iii)   Terms. The Base Agreement must provide:
            (A)   All costs and fees that may be charged by the Base.
               (1)   For each cost or fee that will be charged, the Base
Agreement must provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the
cost or fee.
               (2)   For each cost or fee that may be charged, the Base
Agreement must provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the
conditions that will result in the imposition of such cost or fee.
            (B)   An explanation of how the Driver's earnings will be
calculated, including but not limited to a percentage of fares paid by
passengers that will be forwarded to the Driver or a formula used by the Base.
            (C)   All requirements the Driver or Vehicle must meet in order to
receive a dispatch.
         (iv)   Overcharges. Every Base Agreement must contain a clearly
legible notice that overcharging a Driver or Vehicle owner is prohibited by the
Commission's Rules, and that complaints of overcharges may be made in writing
to the Commission or by telephone to 311.
         (v)   Plain Language. Base Agreements must be written in clear and
unambiguous language.
 
                      Fine: First violation: $500;
                      Second and subsequent violations:
                      $1,000 and/or suspension for up to 30
                      days.
35 RCNY §            In addition to the penalty payable to Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(2)(iii)-(v) the Commission, the Hearing Officer
                      must order the Base to pay
                      restitution to the Driver, equal to
                      the amount charged to the Driver in
                      violation of this rule.
 
      (3)   Driver Payments. 
         (i)   A Base may require payment of only those costs and fees
specified in the Base Agreement. Requiring payment of costs and fees not
specified in the Base Agreement is an overcharge.
         (ii)   A Base cannot charge, request or accept a tip.
         (iii)   A Base cannot require payment by a Driver of a summons not
written to the Driver except when:
            a.   the Driver and Base are operating under the terms of a
franchise agreement filed with the Attorney General of the State of New York or
a cooperative agreement filed with the Commission,
            b.   such franchise agreement or cooperative agreement explicitly
allows for such payments, and
            c.   the base does not operate as or dispatch trips on behalf of a
High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (iv)   A Base cannot charge, request or accept any fee for revenue
generated from an Interior Advertising System.
 
             Fine: First violation: $500;
             Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 and/
             or suspension for up to 30 days.
35 RCNY §   In addition to the penalty payable to the      Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(3) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order the
             Base to pay restitution to the Driver, equal
             to the amount charged to the Driver in
             violation of this rule.
 
      (4)   Driver Earnings. 
         (i)   A Base must remit all earnings to the Driver or Vehicle owner. A
Base may only deduct costs and fees from the earnings if those costs and fees
are specified in the Base Agreement as required in Paragraph (2) of this
subdivision and the Base Agreement further provides that such costs and fees
will be withheld from the earnings.
 
                Fine: First violation: $200
                Second violation: $300
                Third violation: $500
35 RCNY §      In addition to the penalty payable to the  Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(4)(i) Commission, the Hearing Officer must order
                the lessor to pay restitution to the
                Driver, equal to the amount owed to the
                Driver.
 
         (ii)   Drivers must be paid earnings for every trip made by the Driver
within one week of the trip's completion except when:
            a.   the Driver and Base are operating under the terms of a
franchise agreement filed with the Attorney General of the State of New York or
a cooperative agreement filed with the Commission,
            b.   such franchise or cooperative agreement explicitly defines the
terms under which and times at which the driver will receive payment for
completed trips, and
            c.   the base does not operate as or dispatch trips on behalf of a
High-Volume For-Hire Service.
 
                 Fine: $100
                 In addition to the penalty payable to
35 RCNY §       the Commission, the Hearing Officer
59B-18(f)(4)(ii) must order the Base to pay restitution Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                 to the Driver, equal to the difference
                 between what the Base paid the Driver
                 and what the Driver actually earned.
 
      (5)   Written Receipts. For every financial transaction under the Base
Agreement or these Rules, the Base must give a written receipt to the Driver or
Vehicle owner.
         (i)   The receipt must include, as applicable, the name of the Driver
and the Vehicle license number subject to the Base Agreement.
         (ii)   The receipt must clearly state the following information with
respect to the payment or deduction:
            (A)   The date;
            (B)   The name of the recipient;
            (C)   The amount;
            (D)   The purpose of the payment or deduction;
            (E)   The number of the section of this chapter or provision of the
Base Agreement that authorizes the payment or deduction; and
            (F)   If the Base is a High-Volume For-Hire Service, the applicable
minimum per minute and per mile rates for the time period covered by the
receipt.
         (iii)   For Driver and Vehicle owner earnings, in addition to the
items specified in Subparagraph (ii) of this paragraph, the receipt must also
include the amount paid by passengers for trips during the time period covered
by the receipt and any calculation used to determine the earnings, including
the per-trip minutes and miles for which the Driver is being paid. Such
calculation must conform to the applicable policy, formula or schedule provided
in the Base Agreement.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $200 per missing receipt Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(5)
 
      (6)   Records Maintenance. A Base must maintain for a period of three
years from the date a Base Agreement expires or is cancelled or from the last
trip dispatched to the Driver or Vehicle, whichever is later:
         (i)   A copy of the executed Base Agreement and any amendments;
         (ii)   Records of all itemized earnings paid to Drivers and Vehicle
owners; and
         (iii)   Records of all itemized payments received from Drivers and
Vehicle owners.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 for each missing item Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(f)(6)
 
      (7)   Form 1099-K. If a High-Volume For-Hire Service is required to
provide a Driver with a Form 1099-K, the High-Volume For-Hire Service must also
provide the Driver:
         (i)   The total mileage for trips covered by the Form 1099-K, and
         (ii)   An itemization of the items deducted from the gross amount
reported on the Form 1099-K.
      (8)   Collective Bargaining Exception. The provisions of this subdivision
do not apply to Bases and Drivers whose business relationship is governed by
the terms of a collective bargaining agreement.
   (g)   Vehicle Leases. Any Vehicle lease agreement entered into between a
Base and Driver must comply with all provisions of 35 RCNY §
59A-21. Failure to comply with any provision of 35 RCNY §
59A-21 shall subject the Base to the penalties contained therein.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance REQUIRED
59B-18(g)   59A-21.
 
   (h)   Business Requirements – Nondiscrimination. No Base may discriminate
against or impose any negative consequences on a Driver based on whether or not
the Driver chooses to operate a For-Hire Vehicle with an Interior Advertising
System, or based on the brand or affiliation of the Interior Advertising
System. Negative consequences and/or discrimination include but are not limited
to: deactivating the Driver, reducing the compensation provided to the Driver,
either directly or indirectly through manipulating the number or type of rides
assigned to the Driver, or disciplinary action.
 
            Penalty:
35 RCNY §  First Violation: $1,000 fine               Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-18(h)   Second Violation: $1,000 and/or Suspension
            for up to 30 days.
 
(Amended City Record 9/20/2016, eff. 10/20/2016; amended City Record 2/13/2017,
eff. 3/15/2017; amended City Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City
Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/
2021; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 3/13/
2023, eff. 3/13/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59B-19 Operations – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Required Information. A Base Owner, other than a High-Volume For-Hire
Service, must make sure that the following records are collected and
transmitted to the Commission on a monthly basis in a format, layout and
procedure prescribed by the Commission:
      (1)   With respect to all dispatched calls:
         (i)   The date, the time, and the location of the Passenger pickup and
drop-off.
         (ii)   The Driver's TLC Driver License number.
         (iii)   The dispatched Vehicle's License number.
         (iv)   The TLC License number of the For-Hire Base that dispatched the
Vehicle.
         (v)   The TLC License number of the For-Hire Base affiliated to the
dispatched Vehicle.
         (vi)   Whether the Passenger is sharing the Vehicle for part or all of
the trip with a Passenger from another dispatched call.
         (vii)   Where applicable, an indication that the trip concluded in a
cancellation by the Passenger or Driver.
      (2)   Affidavit of No Dispatch. Where a base has not dispatched any trips
in a reporting period, the base must submit an affidavit to the TLC affirming
same. Use of e-signature on the TLC website will satisfy this requirement.
 
             Fine: $100 for each day past the date the
             affidavit is due if plead guilty before a
35 RCNY §   hearing and suspension until compliance;
59B-19(a)(2) $150 for each day past the affidavit due  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             if found guilty following a hearing and
             suspension until compliance. Fine amount
             not to exceed $10,000.
 
      (3)   Timely Submission of Trip Records. 
         (i)   A base must submit trip records for a month's trips no later
than the last day of the following month. For example, all September trip
records will be due on October 31st. The following penalties accrue with
respect to each untimely submission of trip records:
 
             Fine: $100 for each day past the date the
             records are due if plead guilty before a
35 RCNY §   hearing and suspension until compliance;
59B-19(a)(3) $150 for each day past the records are due Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             if found guilty following a hearing and
             suspension until compliance. Fine amount
             not to exceed $10,000.
 
      (4)   Incomplete Trip Records. With respect to all trip records submitted
to TLC:
         (i)   Each set of submitted records must be complete and include all
information listed in and required by paragraph (1) of this subdivision, and
for those bases subject to Minimum Driver Payment Requirements, all information
listed in and required by subdivision (d) of this section. The following
penalties accrue with respect to each trip for which all required information
was not submitted.
 
                Fine: $100 per incomplete trip record
                for the first ten incomplete records
35 RCNY §      and suspension until compliance; $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(a)(4)(i) per each incomplete record thereafter
                and suspension until compliance. Fine
                amount not to exceed $10,000.
 
      (5)   Inaccurate Trip Records. With respect to all trip records submitted
to TLC:
         (i)   The records that each Base submits for any time period in which
they dispatch trips must not contain inaccuracies. For example, the date, time
and location of the passenger pick-up that is required by paragraph (1) of this
subdivision must be accurate. The following penalties accrue with respect to
each trip that was submitted inaccurately.
 
                Fine: $100 per trip record inaccuracy
                for the first ten inaccuracies and
35 RCNY §      suspension until compliance; $500 per Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(a)(5)(i) inaccuracy thereafter and suspension
                until compliance. Fine amount not to
                exceed $10,000.
 
      (6)   With respect to all affiliated Vehicles:
         (i)   The Owner's name, mailing address, and home telephone number
         (ii)   The Vehicle's registration number
         (iii)   The Vehicle's License number
         (iv)   The Vehicle's license plate number
         (v)   The name of the Vehicle's insurance carrier and the policy
number
         (vi)   The dates of inspection of the Vehicle and the outcome of each
inspection
 
            Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing
35 RCNY §  and suspension until compliance; $150 if    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(a)   found guilty following a hearing and
            suspension until compliance.
 
   (b)   Maintenance of Required Information.
      (1)   A Base Owner must make sure that all required information listed
above is kept and made available for inspection by Commission representatives
during regular business hours.
      (2)   Required operational records must be maintained at the Base for a
period of 18 months; inspection records must be kept for 12 months.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
59B-19(b)   hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (c)   Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries – Trip Record
Information.
      (1)   Trip Record.
         (i)   Trip Data must be collected and stored by the Technology System
Provider (TSP) electronically, through the use of the Technology System.
         (ii)   If the Technology System is inoperable, a written Trip Record
must be kept by the Driver during the 48-hour period the Street Hail Livery is
permitted to operate after timely notification of the malfunction. (See 35 RCNY
§
59B-52(c)) 
         (iii)   A written Trip Record, if required, must be kept for eighteen
months.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(c)(1)
 
      (2)   Written Trip Records. A written Trip Record must include the
following information:
         (i)   The Street Hail Livery License number
         (ii)   The TLC Driver License number
         (iii)   The location where each passenger is picked up
         (iv)   The time each passenger is picked up
         (v)   The total number of passengers
         (vi)   The location where each passenger is dropped off
         (vii)   The time each passenger is dropped off
         (viii)   The total trip mileage
         (ix)   The itemized metered fare for the trip (fare, tolls, surcharge,
and tip, if paid by credit or debit card)
         (x)   Method of payment
         (xi)   The trip number
         (xii)   Whether the trip is a Hail Trip or a Pre-Arranged Trip
         (xiii)   Other information required by the Commission
         (xiv)   For a Pre-Arranged Trip, the following information is
required:
            A.   The time of dispatch.
            B.   If the dispatch was for a Pre-Arranged Trip to begin with an
airport pickup.
      (3)   Access to Trip Record and Trip Data.
         (i)   Trip Data and Trip Record information must be available to the
Commission (in a form and format and delivery method as specified by the
Commission), the Street Hail Livery Licensee and the Street Hail Livery Driver.
         (ii)   Trip Data and Trip Record information must be available at the
end of each shift and/or at the end of a lease or contract term.
         (iii)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must take possession of any
written Trip Records weekly and hold such Trip Records for eighteen months.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(c)(3)
 
      (4)   Changes and Corrections.
         (i)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not knowingly enter false
information into the electronic data system for entry onto the electronic Trip
Record
         (ii)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not make erasures or
obliterate information on a written Trip Record, or other record that Owner is
required to maintain.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(c)(4)(i)-(ii)
 
         (iii)   If a wrong entry is made on any written Trip Record, the
Driver, the Street Hail Livery Licensee or Street Hail Livery Base Owner must
correct it and record the date, time, and reason for the change. This record
must be kept as long as the written Trip Record must be kept.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-19(c)(4)(iii)
 
         (iv)   Trip Records, whether electronic or paper, must not be changed
either in whole or in part, unless authorized by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance
59B-19(c)(4)(iv) days                                           REQUIRED
 
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/13/2017, eff. 3/15/2017; amended City
Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/
2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 2/2/
2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 59B-20 Operations – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Base Name.
      (1)   File with Commission. A For-Hire Base Owner must file with the
Commission a Base name and any public facing name it uses in its branding,
operations, promotions or advertising as its trade, business or operating
names.
      (2)   No "Substantially Similar" Names. The Chairperson can reject any
such Base name or trade, business or operating name if, in the judgment of the
Chairperson, such name is substantially similar to the trade, business or
operating name of another Base.
      (3)   Only One Name and One Trade, Business, or Operating Name per Base.
         (i)   A Base must use only one Base name and only one trade, business
or operating name in its operations, including in its public communications,
advertising, promotional activities, and Passenger solicitation activities.
         (ii)   A Base can add words such as "premium" or "select" to its
approved trade name to promote a different level of service, if the Base offers
multiple levels of service.
      (4)   Only One Base per Name. Any trade, business or operating name
approved by the Chairperson for one Base cannot be used by any other Base,
unless both Bases seeking to use the same trade, business or operating name
share identical Owners.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-20(a)
 
   (b)   Mailing and Email Address.
      (1)   A For-Hire Base Owner must file the address of its Base with the
Commission.
      (2)   A For-Hire Base Owner must have a working Email Address at all
times.
      (3)   A For-Hire Base Owner must report any change of Mailing Address or
Email Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-20(b)(1)-(3)
 
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the For-Hire Base Owner.
      (5)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
For-Hire Base Owner.
   (c)   Capacity for 24-Hour Access.
      (1)   A For-Hire Base Owner must maintain a current telephone number on
file with the Commission.
      (2)   This number must be connected to an answering machine or must be a
pager number, an answering service telephone number, or something similar that
allows the Commission to reach the Base Owner on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-20(c)
 
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015)
§ 59B-21 Operations – Additional Records to be Maintained and Reported.
   (a)   Maintenance of Current Rate Schedule.
      (1)   A Base Owner must file a Rate Schedule with the Commission, in a
form approved by the Chairperson. This Rate Schedule must include any lawful
price multipliers or variable pricing policies and the Base's rates for rides
dispatched by the Base for Pre-Arranged Trips provided by Street Hail Liveries,
if the Base dispatches Street Hail Liveries.
      (2)   A new Rate Schedule must be filed:
         (i)   Whenever rates are changed and also
         (ii)   Annually, no later than the anniversary date of the License,
         (iii)   With every renewal application
         (iv)   With any application to change the Ownership or location of the
Base.
      (3)   Failure to file a Rate Schedule with a renewal application or an
application to change Ownership or location will result in denial of the
application by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(a)
 
   (b)   Hours of Operation. A Base Owner must file with the Chairperson the
Base's hours of operations and must notify the Chairperson of any change in the
hours of operation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(b)
 
   (c)   Public Access Information.
      (1)   A Base Owner must file with the Chairperson all contact information
made available to or offered to the public for purposes of pre-arranging
transportation for hire, including but not limited to telephone numbers,
smartphone applications, websites, and email addresses.
      (2)   If the contact information made available to or offered to the
public for purposes of pre-arranging transportation for hire cannot be used to
contact the Base for trip-related customer service, a Base Owner must file with
the Chairperson a working customer service telephone number and/or email
address.
      (3)   These telephone numbers, smartphone applications, websites, email
addresses, and other contact information and methods can be used only with the
name of the Base or the Base's trade, business or operating name approved under
35 RCNY §
59B-20(a).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(c)
 
   (d)   Affiliated Vehicles and Drivers List.
      (1)   A Base Owner must maintain paper or electronic records of all For-
Hire Vehicles that are or have been affiliated with or dispatched by the Base
during the prior 12-month period, including, as applicable:
         (i)   Dates of affiliation,
         (ii)   Vehicle identification numbers,
         (iii)   Department of Motor Vehicles (or equivalent) registration
numbers,
         (iv)   For-Hire Vehicle License numbers,
         (v)   Inspection records.
         (vi)   Copies of forms affiliating and disaffiliating Vehicles.
      (2)   A Base Owner must maintain paper or electronic records of all
Drivers of these Vehicles including:
         (i)   Dates of operation,
         (ii)   Department of Motor Vehicles driver's license numbers,
         (iii)   TLC Driver License numbers.
 
35 RCNY §         Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(d)(1) & (2)
 
      (3)   Filing Notice with the Commission. A Base Owner, other than a High-
Volume For-Hire Service, must send the Commission the list of affiliated
Drivers and Vehicles (described in (1) and (2) above) on a quarterly basis.
High-Volume For-Hire Services must report eligible drivers and affiliated
Vehicles to the Commission on a monthly basis pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59D-16(d).
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(d)(3)
 
      (4)   Special Reporting Requirements for Street Hail Livery Bases. A
Street Hail Livery Base Owner must maintain and report all information required
by this subdivision 59B-21(d) electronically in a format specified by the
Commission. All such information must also be maintained by the Street Hail
Livery Base Owner for at least 12 months.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(d)(4)
 
   (e)   Evidence of Compliance with Off-Street Parking Rules – Livery Base
Only. A Livery Base Owner must maintain and have available for inspection at
the Base the evidence of compliance with off street parking requirements in the
form required by 35 RCNY §
59B-15(J).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(e)
 
   (f)   Compliance with all Record Keeping Rules. A Base Owner must comply
with all record-keeping procedures established and required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-21(f)   $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (g)   Information Security and Use of Personal Information Policy. If the
Base collects or maintains passenger "Personal Information," as defined by New
York General Business Law §899-aa(1)(a), or if the Base collects or maintains
passenger geolocation data, the Base Owner must file with the Commission a
current detailed information security and use of personal information policy.
Such policy must include, a minimum:
      (1)   a statement of internal access policies relating to passenger and
driver personal information for employees, contractors, and third party access,
if applicable;
      (2)   a statement that, except to the extent necessary to provide credit,
debit, and prepaid card services and services for any application that provides
for electronic payment, personal information will only be collected and used
with such passenger's affirmative express consent and that such personal
information will not be used, shared, or disclosed, except for lawful purposes;
      (3)   procedures for notifying the Commission and affected parties of any
breach of the security of the system, pursuant to section 899-aa of the General
Business Law;
      (4)   a statement that any credit, debit, or prepaid card information
collected by the Base or a credit, debit, or prepaid card services provider is
processed by the Base or such provider in compliance with applicable payment
card industry standards, and;
      (5)   a statement of the Base's policies regarding the use of passenger
geolocation information, which must include, at a minimum, a prohibition on the
use, monitoring, or disclosure of trip information, including the date, time,
pick-up location, drop-off location, and real-time vehicle location and any
retained vehicle location records, without such passenger's affirmative express
consent.
   (h)   Compliance with Information Security and Use of Personal Information
Policy. Any Base that files with the TLC an information security and use of
personal information policy must comply with the terms of such policy.
   (i)   Security Breach. If the Base is required to make disclosures under New
York State or Federal law regarding security breaches, including the New York
State Information Security Breach and Notification Act (General Business Law
§899-aa), the Base Owner must inform the Commission immediately following such
disclosure(s).
 
35 RCNY §         Penalty: $1,000 fine per day and Appearance REQUIRED
59B-21 (h) and (i) suspension until compliance
 
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City
Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-22 Records – Reporting Requirements for Street Hail Liveries.
   (a)   TSP Required. Every Street Hail Livery must be equipped with a
Technology System.
   (b)   Trip Data Collection and Transmission.
      (1)   All Trip Data must be transmitted to the Commission in a form and
format and delivery method as specified by the Commission.
      (2)   To the extent necessary to facilitate data transfer, the Commission
may mandate that each Street Hail Livery be equipped with external antennas.
      (3)   No equipment designed to comply with the provisions of this section
may be installed unless it has been approved by the Commission based on a
determination that the equipment conforms to the specifications set herein, is
safe, and fulfills the intended purposes for such equipment.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-22(b)(1)-(3)
 
(Amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 59B-23 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Rates Must Not Exceed Scheduled Rates. A Base Owner must not quote or
charge a fare that is more than the fare listed in the Rate Schedule filed with
the Commission.
 
            Fine: $200 for Passenger overcharge,
35 RCNY §  whether from any quote or from schedule of Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-23(a)   fares required to be filed with the
            Commission.
 
   (b)   Rate Quotes – Livery Base Only.
      (1)   Each time a prospective Passenger contacts a Base for
transportation, regardless of the means by which the Passenger contacts the
Base, the Base Station Owner must ask the Passenger to specify a destination
and any intermediate stop(s). If the Passenger specifies a destination and any
intermediate stop(s), the Base Station Owner must provide the prospective
Passenger with an accurate and binding price quote for travel to the specified
destination and any intermediate stop(s). If the Passenger does not specify a
destination and any intermediate stop(s), the Base Station Owner must then
provide the Passenger with an accurate and binding statement of how the fare is
to be calculated, which can be by time, mileage, zones, or other means.
      (2)   Disclosure. For requests for transportation made by means other
than a telephone call, the Base Station Owner must ask the Passenger to specify
a destination and any intermediate stop(s), and must prominently disclose in
writing to the Passenger, as the Passenger books the trip, that the Passenger
will receive an accurate and binding price quote for the trip upon entering his
or her destination.
      (3)   Honoring Rate Quotes. If the Passenger agrees to receive the
transportation, the Base Owner must honor the price quoted unless the Passenger
changes the date, time, or location of the pick up; the destination or number
of stops; or the vehicle type requested, if any.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-23(b)   $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (c)   Special Rule for Street Hail Liveries. Fares for Hail Trips in Street
Hail Liveries will be as set forth in 35 RCNY §
82-26.
   (d)   Transportation by Pre-Arrangement Only.
      (1)   A Base Owner must be responsible for ensuring that transportation
is provided only by pre-arrangement through the Base.
      (2)   A Base Owner must ensure that a For-Hire Vehicle does not accept
passengers except by pre-arrangement through the base. Exception: A Street Hail
Livery affiliated with a Street Hail Livery Base can provide transportation by
accepting hails from passengers in the street in the Hail Zone.
      (3)   A Base Owner is responsible and can be issued a summons if Vehicles
improperly accept Passenger. A Base Owner's liability will be based on a three
month weighted average of total vehicles affiliated with the Base. It will be a
defense to any summons issued under this rule that the Base can demonstrate an
average of ten Pre-Arranged Trips per affiliated vehicle per day.
 
            Fine: $1,000 if 10% of the Base's
            affiliated vehicles receive summonses under
35 RCNY §  35 RCNY §
59B-23(d)   59A-25(a) $3,000 if 20% of the Base's       Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            affiliated vehicles receive summonses under
            35 RCNY §
            59A-25(a)
 
   (e)   (1)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must ensure that no Street Hail
Livery affiliated with the Street Hail Livery Base, or any other Vehicle
affiliated with the Street Hail Livery Base, will provide transportation by
accepting hails from passengers in the Hail Exclusionary Zone.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner is responsible and can be issued a
summons if Vehicles improperly accept Passengers. A Street Hail Livery Base
Owner's liability will be based on a three month weighted average of total
vehicles affiliated with the Street Hail Livery Base. It will be a defense to
any summons issued under this rule that the Base can demonstrate an average of
ten Pre-Arranged Trips per affiliated vehicle per day.
 
            Fine: $1,000 if 10% of the Base's affiliated Street Hail
            Livery vehicles receive summonses under 35 RCNY §       Appearance
35 RCNY §  82-13(a)                                                 NOT
59B-23(e)   $3,000 if 20% of the Base's affiliated Street Hail       REQUIRED
            Livery vehicles receive summonses under 35 RCNY §
            82-13(a)
 
   (f)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not dispatch a Street Hail Livery
for a Pre-Arranged Trip beginning in the Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-23(f)
 
   (g)   For Black Car Bases, Luxury Limousine Bases, and High-Volume For-Hire
Services: Fare Estimates. Each time a prospective Passenger contacts a Base for
transportation, regardless of the means by which the Passenger contacts the
Base, the Base must provide, upon request, an estimate of the total fare in
dollars and cents, inclusive of all fees and any price multiplier, for the
specific trip requested, prior to dispatching the trip, subject to the
following requirements:
      (1)   Each Passenger requesting service must be notified of the
passenger's right to receive a fare estimate.
      (2)   A Base must ask any Passenger requesting a fare estimate to specify
a destination.
      (3)   The fare estimate may be expressed in a range in dollar and cents,
provided that the higher price in such range shall not be more than 150 percent
of the lower price in such range.
      (4)   A Base may not charge a Passenger a fare that is more than 120
percent of the fare estimate unless the Passenger takes any action to alter the
estimated route, including, but not limited to, changing the location of the
pick-up, destination, number of stops, or the vehicle type requested, or
requests a route change requiring the payment of a toll.
      (5)   If the fare estimate is expressed in a range, a Base may not charge
the Passenger more than 120 percent of the highest price included in that
range.
      (6)   The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to Black Car
Bases while providing line work, as that term is defined in § 19-545 of the
Administrative Code.
      (7)   Affirmative Defense. A Base can offer an affirmative defense to a
summons issued under paragraphs (3) or (4) of this subdivision if the Base can
demonstrate that the Base reimbursed the Passenger the portion of the fare
charged that exceeded 120 percent of the given fare estimate within 10 business
days of receiving a request for reimbursement from the Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-23(g)
   (h)   Tips and Gratuities. A Base Owner must provide a means to allow
passengers to tip Drivers using the same method of payment that passengers use
to pay for the fare. A Base Owner must remit to the Driver the entirety of
anything designated as a tip or gratuity collected by the Base Owner from a
customer on behalf of the Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-23(h)
 
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 7/20/2017, eff. 8/19/2017; amended City
Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-24 Minimum Driver Payment Requirements. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; repealed City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59B-25 Operations – Miscellaneous Operating Requirements.
   (a)   No Street Hails Permitted. A Base Owner must maintain and enforce
rules and policies preventing Vehicles affiliated with the Base or dispatched
by the Base and Drivers of these Vehicles from accepting street hails and
preventing Street Hail Liveries from accepting Hail Trips in the Hail
Exclusionary Zone. NOTE: Street Hail Liveries are permitted to accept street
hails in Hail Zone.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-25(a)
 
   (b)   Prohibited Use of "Taxi." A Base Owner must not hold himself out for
business as a "taxi" or "taxicab" service or in any way use the word "taxi,"
"taxicab," "cab," "hack," or "coach" to describe the business.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-25(b)
 
   (c)   Advertising of Commission License.
      (1)   A Base Owner must clearly state that the Base is licensed by the
Commission in all Passenger-facing advertising, whether print, broadcast,
electronic or Internet, and in all handbills, fliers, websites, smartphone
applications, or other promotional materials and on all business cards and
receipts.
      (2)   All of the advertising and materials listed in (1) above must
include the For-Hire Base License number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-25(c)
 
   (d)   Termination of Affiliation.
      (1)   Base Owner Termination. A Base Owner can terminate the affiliation
of a Vehicle only by:
         (i)   Giving the Chairperson an agreement signed and dated by both
parties in which the Vehicle Owner consents to the termination, or
         (ii)   Sending notice to the Vehicle Owner's Mailing Address by
certified mail, return receipt requested, together with proof of mailing, and
sending copies of the notice and proof of mailing mailed to the Commission.
         (iii)   Termination will become effective either:
            A.   The date of the Vehicle Owner's signed agreement, or
            B.   The date notice is mailed to the Vehicle Owner.
         (iv)   A Base Owner can notify the Commission at any time when a
Vehicle is no longer affiliated with Owner's Base; this notification will be a
defense to any liability attaching to the Owner for damage to persons or
property caused by the Vehicle after the notification.
      (2)   Automatic Termination of Affiliation.
         (i)   A Vehicle's affiliation with a Base will terminate automatically
when any of the following occurs:
            A.   The Base License is revoked
            B.   The Base License is suspended for more than 30 continuous
days;
            C.   The Base License expires
         (ii)   In addition, a Vehicle's affiliation with a Base will terminate
automatically upon expiration or revocation of the Vehicle's License.
   (e)   Passenger Complaint Notification. Upon receipt of a Passenger
complaint related to a Driver, a Base Owner must provide the Passenger with the
"311" Commission complaint telephone number and inform the Passenger that only
the TLC can suspend or revoke a Driver's TLC License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-25(e)
 
   (f)   Dispatching to Vehicles at Airports. A Base Owner must not dispatch a
Vehicle parked or otherwise located at Kennedy Airport or La Guardia Airport
unless the Vehicle is parked in an area other than the airport's designated
passenger pick up locations.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-25(f)
 
   (g)   Base Name and Rates on Booking Tools. If a Base allows a Passenger to
request a dispatch through its own publicly available Passenger-facing booking
tool without speaking to a dispatcher, the Passenger-facing booking tool must
use only the Base Name or the trade, business, or operating name the Base has
on file with the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-20(a)(1) and must display the Base's rates or fares within the booking
tool.
   (h)   For Black Car Bases, Luxury Limousine Bases, and High-Volume For-Hire
Services: Price Multipliers. If a price multiplier or variable pricing policy
is in effect at the time at which a customer requests a Vehicle from a Black
Car Base, Luxury Limousine Base, or High-Volume For-Hire Service, such Base
must require the customer to affirmatively acknowledge and accept the price
multiplier or variable pricing policy prior to dispatching a Vehicle to the
customer.
   (i)   Receipts. If a Base provides a receipt for a trip, the receipt must
contain all of the following information:
      (1)   The Dispatching Base License number;
      (2)   Vehicle License number;
      (3)   Vehicle's affiliated Base License number;
      (4)   Driver's TLC License number;
      (5)   Total amount due;
      (6)   Itemized fees charged (if any) including any price multiplier or
variable pricing policy in effect for the trip;
      (7)   The "311" Commission complaint telephone number; and
      (8)   The public access information the Base has on file with the
Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-21(c).
   (j)   Electronic Dispatch Requests to Drivers. If a Base sends dispatch
requests to Drivers through an electronic, Driver-facing interface, that
interface must be available to a Driver ONLY when the Vehicle is standing or
stopped, except that the Driver-facing interface can permit a Driver to accept
a dispatch with a single touch using pre-programmed buttons or using voice
activation while the vehicle is in motion. All other uses of a Driver-facing
interface must be velocity gated to prevent its use while the vehicle is in
motion.
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City
Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/
2021)
§ 59B-26 Vehicles – Inspections.
   (a)   Tri-Annual Inspection Required. For-Hire Vehicles must be inspected
three times a year at least once every four months and a Base must not dispatch
a Vehicle that has missed an inspection until the Vehicle passes inspection.
 
35 RCNY §  Base Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-26(a)
 
§ 59B-27 Vehicles – Meets Safety Standards.
   (a)   Unsafe or Unfit Vehicles.
      (1)   No For-Hire Vehicle can be used in a For-Hire Vehicle service after
the Commission or the NYS DMV has determined that the Vehicle is unsafe or
unfit for use as a For-Hire Vehicle, and the Owner has been directed to remove
the Vehicle from service.
      (2)   If the Commission or the Commission's inspection facility
determines that the Vehicle is unsafe or unfit, the Decals must be removed by
the Commission.
      (3)   If the NYS DMV or a DMV inspection facility determines that the
Vehicle is unsafe or unfit, the Vehicle Owner must return the Decals to the
Chairperson within 72 hours after the determination is made.
      (4)   If the Chairperson has any reason to believe that any For-Hire
Vehicle is unsafe or unfit for use, the Chairperson can order the Vehicle to
report to the Commission's inspection facility.
   (b)   Seat and Shoulder Belts. Each For-Hire Vehicle must have all seat
belts and shoulder belts clearly visible, accessible, and in good working
order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – 25Appearance REQUIRED
59B-27(b)
 
   (c)   Shoulder Belts Required. In addition to seat belts for each seating
position and shoulder belts for both outside front seat positions, all For-Hire
Vehicles must be equipped with shoulder belts for both outside Passenger rear
seat positions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – 25Appearance REQUIRED
59B-27(c)
 
§ 59B-28 Vehicles – Miscellaneous Requirements.
   (a)   Post-Manufacture Alteration.
      (1)   No For-Hire Vehicle License can be altered after manufacture:
         (i)   To increase its length, width, weight or seating capacity, or
         (ii)   To modify its chassis and/or body design.
      (2)   Exception for all types of Vehicles. A For-Hire Vehicle can also be
altered, after manufacture, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all
of the following:
         (i)   The modification has been made under a program approved in
advance by the original vehicle manufacturer, and
         (ii)   The alteration has been performed by an entity approved and
certified by the vehicle manufacturer to perform such alterations.
         (iii)   An original, unaltered, approved vehicle modifier's
certification sticker must be affixed to the Vehicle attached to the left
center post or hinge post.
      (3)   Exception for Vehicles seating 10 or more passengers and NOT exempt
from NYS DOT Requirements. A For-Hire Vehicle can be altered, after
manufacture, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all of the
following:
         (i)   The Vehicle, as modified, has been approved by the NYS
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under Section 401(1)(b) of the NYS Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
         (ii)   The Vehicle has passed inspection by the NYS Department of
Transportation under 17 NYCRR § 720.
         (iii)   For such modified For-Hire Vehicles, the inspections required
by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f) and 35 RCNY §
59A-26(a) and the requirement to meet safety standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-27, will be inspections of, and determinations by, the NYS Department of
Transportation.
         (iv)   A modified For-Hire Vehicle must still pass a visual inspection
at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division at application and renewal as
required by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f).
         (v)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (vi)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (vii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (viii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (ix)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (4)   Exception for Vehicles seating 10 or more passengers (including the
driver) and exempt from NYS DOT Requirements. A For-Hire Vehicle can be
altered, after manufacture, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all
of the following:
         (i)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (ii)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (iii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (iv)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (v)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (5)   Exception for modified Vehicles seating 9 or fewer and exempt from
NYS DOT inspection and operating authority requirements. A For-Hire Vehicle can
be altered, after manufacture, even if the original vehicle manufacturer has
not approved the program, provided that the Vehicle, as modified, meets all of
the following:
         (i)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (ii)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (iii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (iv)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (v)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
      (6)   Exception for modified Vehicles seating 9 or fewer and NOT exempt
from NYS DOT inspection and operating authority requirements. A For-Hire
Vehicle can be altered, after manufacture, even if the original vehicle
manufacturer has not approved the program, provided that the Vehicle, as
modified, meets all of the following:
         (i)   The Vehicle, as modified, has been approved by the NYS
Commissioner of Motor Vehicles under Section 401(1)(b) of the NYS Vehicle and
Traffic Law.
         (ii)   The Vehicle has passed inspection by the NYS Department of
Transportation under 17 NYCRR § 720.
         (iii)   For such modified For-Hire Vehicles, the inspections required
by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f) and 35 RCNY §
59A-26(a) and the requirement to meet safety standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
59A-27, will be inspections of, and determinations by, the NYS Department of
Transportation.
         (iv)   A modified For-Hire Vehicle must still pass a visual inspection
at the Commission's Safety and Emissions Division at application and renewal as
required by 35 RCNY §
59A-04(e) and (f).
         (v)   The For-Hire Vehicle must be properly registered with the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles and must have been re-registered after completion
of the modification.
         (vi)   The Vehicle must carry the modifier's sticker certifying that
the modification was conducted in accordance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards.
         (vii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must certify that it is registered
with the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
         (viii)   The modifier of the Vehicle must provide a warranty that the
vehicle will be free from defects in material and workmanship, including that
the chassis and frame will be free from defects for a period of 3 years or
60,000 miles, whichever comes first.
         (ix)   The modifier of the Vehicle must maintain a General Liability
Insurance Policy in a minimum amount of $5,000,000.
 
35 RCNY §  Base Owner Fine: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-28(a)
 
   (b)   Proper Vehicle Identification Required. A Base Owner must not dispatch
a Vehicle unless the Vehicle complies with the following requirements:
      (1)   License Plate Number Matches. The license plate number on the motor
vehicle tax stamp, on the state registration certificate, and on the Commission
Decals must match each other and must match the number on the license plates
affixed to the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-28(b)(1)
 
      (2)   Vehicle Identification Number Matches. The last six digits of the
vehicle identification number (VIN) on the Commission Decals must match the
last six digits of the VIN on the state registration, and the VIN on the
Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-28(b)(2)
 
      (3)   T & LC License Plates. A For-Hire Vehicle that is registered in New
York must have official "T & LC" license plates.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 – $350 and Suspension until Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-28(b)(3) compliance
 
      (4)   License Plates for Street Hail Liveries. A Street Hail Livery must
be registered in New York and must have license plates issued by the NYS DMV
and embossed with the legend "T & LC". No "vanity" plates are permitted for
Street Hail Liveries.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 - $350 and Suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59B-28(b)(4) compliance
 
§ 59B-29 Vehicles – Markings & Advertising.
 A Base Owner must not dispatch a Vehicle unless the Vehicle complies with the
following requirements.
   (a)   Valid License Decals.
      (1)   Three Valid Commission License Decals must be plainly visible and
affixed to the Vehicle in the following locations:
         (i)   One Decal must be on the lower front right side of the
windshield.
         (ii)   One Decal must be on the lower rear corner of each of the two
rear quarter windows; if there are no rear quarter windows, the Decals must be
on the lower rear window just above the rear door.
         (iii)   The Decals must be affixed by Commission staff.
      (2)   When the Vehicle License is renewed or when the Vehicle is
replaced, changes affiliation, or changes its license plates, the Vehicle must
be brought to the Commission Safety and Emissions Division to have new Decals
placed on the Vehicle.
      (3)   Exception for Luxury Limousines. Any For-Hire Vehicle that is a
Luxury Limousine will only be required to have a single Commission Decal
affixed to the lower right side of the front windshield.
 
            Failure to have proper Decals: $500 for the
35 RCNY §  first offense in 12 months; $1,000 for the  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(a)   second and subsequent offenses within a 12-
            month period.
 
   (b)   Valid Registration Sticker. A valid registration sticker from an
authorized state motor Vehicle department must be affixed to the left front
windshield so as to be plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(b)
 
   (c)   Inspection Sticker. A Valid New York State DMV inspection sticker that
has at least eight months left before the sticker expires must be clearly
visible on the left side of the front windshield.
 
35 RCNY §  Base Owner Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(c)
 
   (d)   Taxicab Yellow Prohibited. No part of a For-Hire Vehicle can be
painted any shade of Taxicab yellow.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 for the first violation; $500 for
59B-29(d)   the second violation in 24 months; Revocation Appearance REQUIRED
            for the third violation in 36 months
 
   (e)   Prohibited Advertising.
      (1)   A Vehicle must not display advertising on the outside or the inside
unless the Commission has authorized the advertising and has given the Vehicle
Owner a permit specifying that the advertising complies with the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   The Commission will not approve any roof top advertising for For-
Hire Vehicles, except for Street Hail Liveries.
      (3)   Street Hail Liveries: Optional Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
         (i)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee may equip a Taxicab with an
authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture in accordance with 35 RCNY §
82-63.
      (4)   A Vehicle must not display or attempt to display any interior
advertising unless the advertising has been authorized by the Commission and a
License has been issued to the Interior Advertising Provider in accordance with
the provisions of
Subchapter 59E of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
59B-29(e)   hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Motor Vehicle Tax Stamp.
      (1)   For Vehicles registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles
before April 30, 1999, a Valid NYC commercial use motor vehicle tax stamp must
be affixed to the front right side of the windshield of the Vehicle and clearly
visible.
      (2)   For Vehicles registered after April 30, 1999, the Owner must show
proof that the required commercial use motor vehicle tax for the current tax
period has been paid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(f)
 
   (g)   Livery Base Station Affiliation Signs. A For-Hire Livery Vehicle must
identify its affiliated Base Station on the outside of the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   The name of the Base Station, its License number and telephone
number in one of the following ways:
         (i)   In letters and numerals at least one-and-one-half inches in
height, on the outside of a door or doors on both sides of the Vehicle, below
the windows and at least six inches above the bottom of the door(s);
         (ii)   In letters and numerals at least one inch in height in one
location on the rear of the Vehicle below the rear window, and at least six
inches above the bottom of the rear of the Vehicle, or
         (iii)   Both on the doors and rear of the Vehicle.
      (2)   The letters and numerals must be of a color that contrasts with the
color of the body of the Vehicle so that it is easy to see and read.
      (3)   Lettering and numbering must be spaced to provide easy legibility
and, if placed on doors on both sides of the Vehicle must be identical on both
sides of the livery.
      (4)   All Decals must be semi-permanent adhesive stickers.
      (5)   Exemption. Luxury Limousines and Black Cars are exempt from the
requirements of this subdivision.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(g)
 
   (h)   Required Signage for Accessible Vehicles. Any Accessible Vehicle
licensed by the Commission must display signs that identify the Vehicle as an
Accessible Vehicle. The signs design will be provided by the Commission on its
Web site or through other appropriate means as announced on its Web site. The
signs must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars of a sedan or an
SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both sides of the
Vehicle.
      (2)   Must be visible to Passengers entering the Accessible Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(h)
 
   (i)   Required Signage for Clean-Air Vehicles. Any Clean Air For-Hire
Vehicle licensed by the Commission must display signs that identify the Vehicle
as a Clean Air Vehicle. The signs design will be provided by the Commission on
its Web site or through other appropriate means as announced on its Web site.
The signs must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars of a sedan or an
SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both sides of the
Vehicle.
      (2)   Must be visible to Passengers entering the Clean Air Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(i)
 
   (j)   Markings – Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries.
      (1)   Street Hail Liveries must comply with the markings requirements of
35 RCNY §
82-33.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base must not permit a Street Hail Livery
affiliated with it to operate unless it has the proper markings.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(j)(2)
 
   (k)   Color – Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries.
      (1)   The exterior of the Street Hail Livery vehicle must be painted
Street Hail Livery color to be designated, except for the trim. The
specifications for Street Hail Livery color to be designated will be posted on
the Commission's Web site.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base must not permit a Street Hail Livery
affiliated with it to operate unless it is painted as required by this section.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(k)(2)
 
   (l)   Required Sticker. Each For hire-vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing."
The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The
sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. If
displayed, the sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(l)(1) and (2)
 
   (m)   Optional Sticker. For hire-vehicles may display an optional external
sticker, with the following inscription: "The choices you make behind the wheel
matter." The dimensions of the sticker are 15 inches wide by 4 inches wide. The
sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. If
displayed, the sticker must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (n)   Required Sticker. Each For Hire-Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver
Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the
sticker are 8.0 inches wide by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Incorporated into the Livery Bill of Rights.
The provisions of this subdivision do not apply to black cars and luxury
limousines.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
59B-29(n)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (o)   Optional Sticker. Each For Hire-Vehicle may display an external safety
sticker, with the following inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are
Protected By New York State Law ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By
Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5
inches wide by 3.5 inches high. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the
instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
 
      (1)   On a rear passenger window.
   (p)   Required Decal. Each For-Hire Vehicle with Hearing Induction Loop
capability must display a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature
the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile
of an ear with a wide diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top
right. The symbol contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will
be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will be placed
as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
59B-29(p)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (q)   Required Decal. Each For-Hire Vehicle must display decals provided by
the Commission warning passengers to look for cyclists before opening the door.
Such decals must be placed on the inside of both rear passenger doors.
 
            Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
35 RCNY §  $75 if found guilty following a hearing. No Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-29(q)   penalty for missing decal if condition is
            corrected within 10 days
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 2/4/2025,
eff. 3/6/2025; amended City Record 9/25/2025, eff. 10/25/2025)
§ 59B-30 Vehicles – Items Required to be in Vehicle.
   (a)   Licenses and Certificates. No For-Hire Vehicle can be dispatched by a
For-Hire Base unless the Vehicle contains:
      (1)   On the right visor, on top of the right side of the dashboard or in
the glove compartment:
         (i)   The certificate of registration or a legible copy of it
         (ii)   The insurance card or a legible copy of it
      (2)   In a protective holder attached to the back of the driver's seat in
the Vehicle:
         (i)   The TLC Driver license of the Driver; and
         (ii)   The For-Hire Vehicle License.
      (3)   Exception for Black Cars and Luxury Limousines.
         (i)   Black Cars and Luxury Limousines must comply with all
requirements of this subdivision (a) except that these Vehicles will not be
required to have a protective holder mounted behind the driver's seat to
display the TLC Driver License.
         (ii)   Those items must, however, be displayed in the Vehicle in a way
so as to be clearly visible from the Passenger seat and available for
inspection by the Passenger upon request.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $50 for each violation of this rule;
59B-30(a)(1)-(3) however, no fine for a violation of this   Appearance REQUIRED
                 rule can exceed $100.
 
      (4)   Modified Vehicles. If the Vehicle has been modified after
manufacture and IS exempt from NYS Department of Transportation inspection and
authorization requirements, a copy of the valid exemption letter from the NYS
Department of Transportation must be kept in the Vehicle at all times.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-30(a)(4)
 
   (b)   Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights.
      (1)   Regular Liveries Only: No For-Hire Livery Vehicle can be dispatched
by a For-Hire Base unless the Vehicle contains:
         (i)   The Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights in a form and format
prescribed by the Commission.
         (ii)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site or will provide the information through other appropriate means that will
be posted on its Web site.
         (iii)   The Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights must be placed in a
protective holder attached to the back of the front Passenger's seat.
      (2)   Street Hail Liveries Only: No Street Hail Livery Vehicle can be
dispatched by a Street Hail Livery Base unless the Vehicle contains:
         (i)   The Street Hail Livery Passengers' Bill of Rights in a form and
format prescribed by the Commission.
         (ii)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site or will provide the information through other appropriate means that will
be posted on its Web site.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-30(b)
 
   (c)   Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries. In addition to the
other requirements of this section, a Street Hail Livery Base Owner must ensure
that all Street Hail Liveries dispatched by the Base comply with the following:
      (1)   No Street Hail Livery can be dispatched unless the Vehicle contains
the Rate Card in a frame next to the TLC Driver License.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-30(c)(1)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 59B-31 Vehicle – Equipment.
A Base Owner must not dispatch a Vehicle from its Base unless the Vehicle is in
compliance with all of the following requirements.
   (a)   Roof Light. A Base Owner must not dispatch a For-Hire Vehicle that is
equipped with a roof light, unless the vehicle falls under one of the following
categories:
         (i)   Staten Island Vehicles: The Vehicle operates primarily in Staten
Island and is affiliated with a Base located in Staten Island. A roof light on
a Staten Island Vehicle must meet the specifications in the definition of "roof
light" in these rules; or
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 – first violation                                              Appearance
59B-31(a)   $500 – second violation in 24 months Revocation for third violation in 36 REQUIRED
(i)         months
 
         (ii)   Street Hail Livery Vehicles: The Vehicle is a Street Hail
Livery. A Street Hail Livery vehicle must be equipped with a roof light meeting
the requirements of 35 RCNY §
82-52.
 
35 RCNY §    Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-31(a)(ii)
 
   (b)   Taximeter. A Base Owner must not dispatch a For-Hire Vehicle that is
equipped with a taximeter. Exception: A Street Hail Livery must be equipped
with a taximeter. See 35 RCNY §
59B-51.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-31(b)
 
   (c)   Distress Signal Light – Livery Vehicle.
      (1)   Requirement. A Base Owner must not dispatch a Livery Vehicle unless
it is equipped with a help or distress signaling light system meeting the
specifications in 35 RCNY §
59C-03.
      (2)   Exemption. Vehicles affiliated only with a Black Car Base or a
Luxury Limousine Base are not subject to this requirement.
      (3)   Requirement. A Base Owner must not dispatch a Livery Vehicle unless
it is equipped with a help or distress signaling light system meeting the
specifications in 35 RCNY §
59C-03.
 
            Fine: $175 and suspension of the vehicle
35 RCNY §  license until the condition is corrected.
59B-31(c)   Respondent must provide a condition       Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            corrected form issued by the TLC's Safety
            and Emissions Division.
 
   (d)   Electronic Dispatching Device. A Base Owner must not dispatch a For-
Hire Vehicle that is equipped with more than the number of electronic devices
used to accept dispatches from a Base allowed under 35 RCNY §
59A-31(e).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-31(f)*
 
* Editor's note: the reference is presented here exactly as promulgated by TLC.
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 59B-32 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions for Livery Vehicles. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; repealed City Record 9/22/2023,
eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59B-33 Vehicle Equipment – In-Vehicle Camera System (IVCS). [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59B-34 Taxicab Specific Vehicle Equipment.
[Reserved.]
§ 59B-35 Penalty Points for Bases.
   (a)   Accumulation of Points. A Base will accumulate Penalty Points as
penalties for violation of certain Rules and upon certain violations by the
Base's affiliated Vehicles, as specified below.
   (b)   Notification of Affiliated Vehicle Points. A Base will be notified by
the Commission (by USPS to the Base Mailing Address) whenever an affiliated
For-Hire Vehicle accumulates a Penalty Point.
   (c)   Assessment of Point for Revocation of Affiliated Vehicle License. A
Base will be assessed one Penalty Point whenever an affiliated For-Hire Vehicle
accumulates Penalty Points sufficient in number and time, that the Commission
revokes the Vehicle's License.
   (d)   Six Penalty Points Requires Base License Revocation. The License of
any Base that accumulates six or more Penalty Points for occurrences during any
License term will be revoked.
   (e)   Points Accrued but not Assessed Before Renewal.
      (1)   If points are imposed after a Base License has been renewed based
on a violation that occurred before the renewal, the points will be added to
the total points accumulated by the Base before its renewal.
      (2)   If the additional Points raise the total number to six or more
Points, the Base License will be revoked.
   (f)   Revoking a License.
      (1)   The Chairperson can begin revocation proceedings whenever a Base
Licensee has been assessed six or more points during the current term of that
License.
      (2)   The Licensee's Base License can also be revoked as part of the
decision imposing the final point necessary for revocation.
   (g)   Separate Proceedings for Base License and Vehicle License Revocation.
At any time revocation of a Base License is mandated and the last penalty point
arises from the same incident that created the For-Hire Vehicle License
revocation mandate, separate proceedings must be held for the Base License
revocation and the Vehicle License revocation.
   (h)   Point Reduction Program. The Chairperson will develop a point
reduction program applicable to Vehicles and Bases.
   (i)   Penalty Point Program Start Date. No Penalty Points will be imposed
for violations occurring before August 1, 2009.
§ 59B-51 Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries – Taximeters.
   (a)   Taximeter.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not dispatch a Street Hail
Livery unless it is equipped with a Taximeter as required in 35 RCNY §
82-38 and the specifications set forth in 35 RCNY §
82-54.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not tamper with, alter, repair
or attempt to repair any of the following:
         (i)   A Taximeter
         (ii)   Any Seal affixed to the taximeter by a licensed Taximeter
repair shop or other authorized facility.
         (iii)   The Technology System
         (iv)   Any cable mechanism or electrical wiring of a Taximeter or
Technology System
      (3)   A Street Hail Livery Base Owner must not make any change in a
vehicle's mechanism or its tires that would affect the operation of the
Taximeter or of the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59B-51(a)   days
 
(Amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 59B-52 Special Requirements for Street Hail Liveries – Technology System.
   (a)   Equip Street Hail Liveries with Technology System. A Street Hail
Livery Base must ensure that each of its Street Hail Liveries is equipped with
the Technology System. The Technology System must comply with the
specifications established in 35 RCNY
Chapter 83.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-52(a)
 
   (b)   Good Working Order. The Technology System equipment must be in good
working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-52(c)
 
   (c)   Malfunction or Failure to Operate.
      (1)   If the Technology System malfunctions or fails to operate, the
Street Hail Livery Base must file an incident report with the authorized
provider within two hours following the discovery of the malfunction or as soon
as the Street Hail Livery Base reasonably should have known of such
malfunction.
      (2)   If the Driver or Street Hail Livery Licensee previously filed an
incident report, the Street Hail Livery Base will not be required to file a
separate incident report. The Street Hail Livery Base must verify that the
report has been filed by obtaining the incident report number from the Driver,
Street Hail Livery Licensee or Technology System Provider.
      (3)   The Street Hail Livery Licensee or the Street Hail Livery Base must
meet the appointment for repair scheduled by the Technology System Provider
following the incident report.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59B-52(c)(1)-(3)
 
   (d)   Inspection upon Multiple Technology System Malfunctions. For any
Street Hail Livery requiring six or more repairs of the vehicle's Technology
System in any 30-day period, the Street Hail Livery Base with which such
vehicle is affiliated must promptly take that vehicle for inspection or
schedule an inspection with the Commission's Safety and Emissions Facility.
This requirement will not apply to the Street Hail Livery Base if compliance is
made by the Street Hail Livery Licensee or Driver of the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59B-52(d)
 
(Amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019)
Subchapter 59C: For-Hire Vehicle Specifications
§ 59C-01 In-Vehicle Camera System ("IVCS"). [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59C-02 Partitions – Livery Vehicles Only. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 9/22/
2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 59C-03 Distress Signal Lights – Livery Vehicles Only.
   (a)   Requirement. An owner must equip all For-Hire Vehicles with a help or
distress signaling light system consisting of two turn signal type "lollipop"
lights.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   One light must be mounted on the front center of the vehicle,
either on top of the bumper or forward or behind the grill. A second light must
be mounted on top of the rear bumper, to the left of the license plate.
      (2)   Each light must be three to four inches in diameter, have a total
rated output of 32 candle power, and be amber-colored or have an amber-colored
lens so that the light output of the device is the color amber at 32 candle
power.
      (3)   The activator must be installed within easy reach of the driver,
must be silent when operating, and must be fully solid-state.
      (4)   The lights must be able to flash between 60 and 120 times per
minute.
§ 59C-04 Specifications for Accessible For Hire Vehicles.
   (a)   An Accessible Vehicle may be approved if it meets the following
conditions:
      (1)   It is a vehicle other than (i) a bus, (ii) a minibus, or (iii) a
van, the chassis for which, as originally manufactured, is designed to seat
eight or more persons.
      (2)   It is capable of transporting at least one passenger using a common
wheelchair (as wheelchair is defined in C.F.R., Title 49, § 37.3).
   (b)   The chassis of the Accessible Vehicle, as originally manufactured,
must have:
      (1)   A maximum horsepower of 290.
      (2)   The original equipment manufacturer’s suspension and steering
components.
      (3)   No bumper modifications.
      (4)   Exception regarding bumpers: A bumper modified to allow
installation of a rear-entry ramp may be approved if it satisfies either of the
following:
         (i)   The rear bumper is reinforced.
         (ii)   The modification meets or exceeds Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards crash testing requirements.
         (iii)   Any rear door lock modifications must meet the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards and the lock must be attached to the chassis, not the
ramp, unless a secondary lock is attached to the chassis.
         (iv)   The modifier must retain an engineer with a bachelor’s degree
in mechanical engineering with at least 3 years of experience in automotive
manufacturing to certify that each vehicle was modified using the design tested
to meet or exceed Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.
         (v)   Separate certification for each vehicle must be presented when
the vehicle is submitted to TLC as a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle.
   (c)   The Accessible Vehicle as manufactured by the original equipment
manufacturer (“OEM”) or as modified by a National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA)-registered second-stage manufacturer (or vehicle
modifier), must meet all applicable Americans with Disability Act
specifications as required for Wheelchair Accessible Vehicles, as well as the
following specifications:
      (1)   The minimum ground clearance (measured from frame, loaded to gross
vehicle weight rating) must be 5 inches.
      (2)   (i)   The passenger compartment length (measured from rear of
driver’s seat base to rear seat base) must be not less than 56 inches.
         (ii)   Exception: For an Accessible Vehicle designed to carry a
Passenger using a wheelchair in the front right position beside the Driver, the
passenger compartment length must be not less than 38 inches.
      (3)   The rear compartment of any vehicle approved for use as an
Accessible Vehicle Model must meet the following dimensions as defined by the
Society of Automotive Engineers:
         (i)   Effective legroom (L51) must be at least 34.6 inches.
      (4)   The front compartment of any vehicle approved for use as an
Accessible Vehicle Model must meet the following dimensions:
         (i)   Effective legroom (L34) must be at least 40 inches.
      (5)   Total legroom (the sum of L34 and L51) must be at least 74.6
inches.
      (6)   Where a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle is modified using a side
entry conversion, the original floor of the Accessible Vehicle, if lowered,
must be lowered from the base of the firewall to the area immediately in front
of the rear axle.
      (7)   If a lowered floor assembly is used in the process of converting a
vehicle to a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle, the lowered floor must be stainless
steel (16 gauge minimum) or the equivalent.
      (8)   Sound-deadening material must be applied over the lowered metal
floor and thoroughly secured.
      (9)   The wheelchair ramp must not obstruct the drivers’ rearview sight
while in the stowed position.
      (10)   The system provided to securely hold one or more wheelchairs in
place must be the system known as Q straint QRT Standard or, if an alternative
system, it must meet or exceed the Q straint QRT Standard.
      (11)   No anchor points may project more than 1/8 of an inch above the
finished floor.
      (12)   If the Accessible Vehicle has a middle fold-up passenger seat, it
must have a folding mechanism and base plate and must meet the requirements of
the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 207, C.F.R., Title 49, and §
571.207.
      (13)   Any modifications to the rear air conditioning must be approved by
the OEM.
      (14)   Any and all electrical wiring, other than as provided by the OEM,
must be PVC-or-better insulated and color-coded for positive identification.
      (15)   The back-up alarm must be an electrically operated device that
produces an intermittent audible signal when the Accessible Vehicle’s
transmission is shifted into reverse.
      (16)   The converted vehicle must be purchased from the same converter
which has manufactured the necessary parts/components and provided the labor to
convert the vehicle.
      (17)   Conversion of a vehicle with a salvage title certificate, as
identified by a relevant State Department of Motor Vehicles, is prohibited.
      (18)   All approved Wheelchair Accessible Vehicles, whether modified or
not, must meet all applicable federal and state emissions requirements and
standards.
(Added City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024; amended City Record 9/25/2025,
eff. 10/25/2025)
Subchapter 59D: High-Volume For-Hire Services
§ 59D-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures, rules and regulations for obtaining and
maintaining a High-Volume For-Hire Service License.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violation of the rules and requirements for
maintaining a High-Volume For-Hire Service License.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity. 
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed (except as provided in this Subchapter), or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a License or Authorization from
the Commission;
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506, § 19-528, and § 19-548 of the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines. 
      (1)   Fines are due within 30 days of the day the Respondent is found
guilty of the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
OATH Hearings Division within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal High-Volume For-Hire Service License.
   (b)   Driver in this Subchapter means a For-Hire Driver.
   (c)   For-Hire Driver in this Subchapter means a Driver of a For-Hire
Vehicle.
   (d)   High-Volume For-Hire Service is a central dispatch facility, as such
term is defined in New York Executive Law §160-cc, that (1) is a Commission-
licensed business, (2) facilitates or otherwise connects passengers to for-hire
vehicles by prearrangement, including through one or more licensed For-Hire
Vehicle Bases, using a passenger-facing booking tool, and (3) dispatches or
facilitates the dispatching of ten-thousand (10,000) or more trips in the City
per day. Any and all bases using a common brand, trade, business or operating
name will be considered together for purposes of identifying a High-Volume For-
Hire Service.
   (e)   Initial High-Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period is the three
month period beginning on a date posted on the Commission's website during
which a Base, or collection of Bases operating under the same brand, trade,
business, or operating name, that connects Passengers to For-Hire Vehicles by
prearrangement and dispatches or facilitates the dispatching of ten thousand or
more trips per day in the City using a passenger-facing booking tool must apply
for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License under this Subchapter or be listed
as a Base through which a High-Volume For-Hire Service dispatches trips on an
application for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License.
   (f)   License in this Subchapter means a High-Volume For-Hire Service
License.
   (g)   Owner in this Subchapter refers to a High-Volume For-Hire Service
Owner. An Owner can be a Business Entity or a person.
   (h)   Passenger-Facing Booking Tool is an application on a smartphone or
other electronic device that allows communication between a Passenger and a
For-Hire Base or High-Volume For-Hire Service. Such communication includes but
is not limited to allowing a Passenger to request, book, or pay for a trip.
   (i)   Respondent means an individual or Business Entity who has been noticed
and charged with a violation of one or more of these Rules or the
Administrative Code, or with being unfit to hold a License.
   (j)   Utilization Rate refers to the percentage of time or distance, in
aggregate, that all Drivers who have made themselves available to accept
dispatches from High-Volume For-Hire Services spend transporting passengers on
trips dispatched by High-Volume For-Hire Services. The Utilization Rate is
calculated by dividing the total amount of time or distance those Drivers spend
transporting passengers on trips dispatched by High-Volume For-Hire Services by
the total amount of time or distance Drivers are available to accept dispatches
from High-Volume For-Hire Services, have been dispatched by a High-Volume For-
Hire Service to pick up a passenger but do not have a passenger in the vehicle,
and are transporting passengers on trips dispatched by a High-Volume For-Hire
Service.
   (k)   Vehicle in this Subchapter refers to a For-Hire Vehicle.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 3/13/2023, eff. 3/13/2023; amended City
Record 7/2/2025, eff. 8/1/2025)
§ 59D-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] Identification.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (c)   Fingerprinting to Verify Good Moral Character.
      (1)   Initial Applicants. An individual or all Limited Business Entity
Persons of a Business Entity applying for a High-Volume For-Hire Service
License must be fingerprinted for the purpose of obtaining criminal history
records.
      (2)   Review of Criminal History. The criminal history must be reviewed
in a manner consistent with Article 23-A of the New York State Correction Law.
      (3)   Additions or Changes to Applicant. Before or within five days after
any change or addition to the Limited Business Entity Persons of a Licensee
which is a Business Entity Licensee:
         (i)   The Licensee must file an application with the Commission for
approval of the change or addition on forms that are prescribed by the
Commission.
         (ii)   The new Limited Business Entity Person(s) must be fingerprinted
as required by this subdivision.
      (4)   The Applicant or Licensee must pay any processing fee required.
   (d)   [Reserved.] Designate Drivers as Agents to Receive Service.
   (e)   Payment of Fines and Fees. 
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity other than the Applicant of which a
Business Entity Person of the Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to its failure to surrender a previously revoked License
(of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in writing
that the License has been surrendered.
   (f)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (g)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (h)   Fit to Hold License. An Applicant (including the individual, Business
Entity or any Limited Business Entity Persons) must demonstrate that it is Fit
to Hold a License.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-05 Licensing – Special Requirements.
   (a)   List of Bases. An Applicant for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License
that is not a renewal Applicant must submit a list of the Bases through which
it dispatched trips during the two years preceding the date the application is
submitted.
   (b)   Business Plan. An Applicant for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License
must submit a business plan for approval by the Commission with each
application for a new or renewal License or for a change of ownership of the
High-Volume For-Hire Service License. The business plan must include:
      (1)   Trip Volumes. 
         (i)   For Renewal Applicants and Applicants during the Initial High-
Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period: the number of trips the Applicant
dispatched, including through a Base, during the previous calendar year
         (ii)   For all Applicants: an estimate of the number of trips per day
the Applicant expects to dispatch upon receipt or renewal of a License and for
the two calendar years immediately following the issuance or renewal of the
License.
      (2)   Vehicle Count. The number of For-Hire Vehicles, including number of
wheelchair-accessible For-Hire Vehicles, the Applicant expects to operate in
accordance with the business plan submitted pursuant to this subdivision.
      (3)   Service Area. The geographic area(s) in the City the Applicant
intends to serve.
      (4)   Accessibility Requirements. 
         (i)   For new License Applicants and Applicants during the Initial
High-Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period: a statement for approval by the
Commission outlining how the Applicant will comply with the accessibility
requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c).
         (ii)   For Renewal Applicants: a demonstration that the Applicant is
in compliance with the accessibility requirements contained in 35 RCNY §
59B-17(c).
   (c)   Impact Analysis. An Applicant for a High-Volume For-Hire Service
License must submit an analysis, in a format prescribed by the Commission,
assessing the impact of the Applicant's proposed operation on the environment.
Such statement must include an assessment of the High-Volume For-Hire Service's
impact on traffic congestion, local transportation including public transit,
private motor vehicles and other modes of transit, and noise.
      (1)   To the extent the Applicant's proposed operation has negative
impacts on the environment that cannot be corrected within 90 days of the day
the application is filed, the Applicant must propose a corrective action plan
for approval by the Commission, outlining the manner and the time in which the
Applicant will mitigate such negative impacts.
   (d)   Driver Payments and Earnings. An Applicant for a High-Volume For-Hire
Service must submit a description of all deductions, including any commissions,
lease fees and other charges, which such Applicant, or the Bases through which
the Applicant dispatches trips, proposes to charge either the For-Hire Vehicle
Owner or the Driver, or both, as applicable, together with an estimate of the
average gross hourly earnings of a Driver, based upon actual or anticipated
trips and fares. The Applicant must certify that it will not impose any charge
or deduction on a For-Hire Vehicle Owner or Driver that has not been submitted
to the Commission.
      (1)   The Applicant must also certify that, absent a reasonable belief
that a Driver's account is associated with fraudulent activity, if a payment
transaction for a completed trip dispatched by the High-Volume For-Hire Service
Licensee fails, the Driver will receive the entire amount owed for such
completed trip.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-05(d)(1)
 
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not charge, request or accept
any fee for revenue generated from an Interior Advertising System to or from a
Driver.
 
             Fine: First violation: $500; Second and
             subsequent violations: $1,000 and/or
             suspension for up to 30 days. In addition
35 RCNY §   to the penalty payable to the Commission,  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-05(d)(2) the Hearing Officer must order the lessor
             to pay restitution to the Driver, equal to
             the amount charged to the Driver in
             violation of this rule.
 
   (e)   High-Volume For-Hire Services must continue to meet all requirements
of 35 RCNY
Subchapter 59B unless otherwise specified.
   (f)   High-Volume For-Hire Services must comply with the requirements set
forth in subdivision (c) of 35 RCNY §
59D-13.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City
Record 10/30/2023, eff. 11/29/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/
2025)
§ 59D-06 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New High-Volume For-Hire Service License Term. The term of a new High-
Volume For-Hire Service License will expire two years after the last day of the
month in which the new License is issued.
   (b)   Initial High-Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period. Any Base, or
collection of Bases operating under the same brand, trade, business, or
operating name, that connects Passengers to For-Hire Vehicles by prearrangement
and dispatched or facilitated the dispatching of an average of ten thousand or
more trips per day in the City using a passenger-facing booking tool during the
six months prior to the Initial High-Volume For-Hire Service Issuance Period
must apply for a High-Volume For-Hire Service License during the High-Volume
For-Hire Service Issuance Period. 
   (c)   High-Volume For-Hire Service License Renewal Term. A License issued to
a renewing Applicant will expire two years after the date on which the previous
License expired.
   (d)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (e)   Extensions. 
      (1)   If a timely application for renewal of a License has been made as
required in subdivision (d) of this section, the Chairperson will extend the
License until review of the renewal application is completed.
      (2)   The License of the renewal Applicant remains effective during this
extended period even if the application is ultimately denied.
      (3)   If the Commission approves the renewal application of a Licensee
whose License has been extended pursuant to this subdivision, the expiration
date of the renewal License will be based on the original expiration date of
the License and not the extended date.
   (f)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (d) of this section if the Licensee wants to maintain
the License. Failure to complete the renewal requirements means that the
License cannot be maintained.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59D-07 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   High-Volume For-Hire Service License Fee. The fee for the operation of
a High-Volume For-Hire Service is $190,000 annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund a fee
if it denies the application.
   (d)   Name Change Fee. The fee to change the name of a High-Volume For-Hire
Service is $500.
   (e)   Relocation Fee. The fee to change the location of a High-Volume For-
Hire Service is $500.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-08 Licensing – Causes for Denial or Revocation.
   (a)   Material Misrepresentation. 
      (1)   The Commission can deny an application for a High-Volume For-Hire
Service License or its renewal and revoke or suspend any License issued if it
finds that an Applicant has made a material misstatement or misrepresentation
on an application for a License or its renewal.
   (b)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements. 
      (1)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a new High-Volume For-
Hire Service License if the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of
an application within 90 days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a renewal High-Volume
For-Hire Service License if the Applicant has not completed all the
requirements of an application by the expiration date of the prior License.
   (c)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License to operate a High-Volume For-Hire Service, the Chairperson
may seek additional information from the Applicant. This request for additional
information may be an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or
other method of communication. This additional consideration may result in the
denial of the application. Failure to provide any requested information within
the time frame requested, or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will
result in a denial of the application.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-09 Compliance with Law – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   High-Volume For-Hire Service License Required. No person or entity is
permitted to operate a business as a High-Volume For-Hire Service without a
Valid High-Volume For-Hire Service License from the Commission.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 per day Appearance REQUIRED
59D-09(a)
 
   (b)   Advertising of Unlicensed For-Hire Service. A High-Volume For-Hire
Service must not hold itself out to the public as a for-hire service without a
current License issued by the Commission for that activity.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 per day Appearance REQUIRED
59D-09(b)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59D-10 Compliance with Law – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery. 
      (1)   Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not offer or give any gift,
gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or member of the
Commission, or any other public servant.
 
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: Revocation and $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Demand for Gratuity. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any
employee, representative, or member of the Commission or any other public
servant.
 
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 days Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(a)(2) or revocation
 
      (3)   Prohibited Offer of Gift to Airport or Transportation Terminal
Staff. A Licensee must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing of value
to a person or persons employed at any airport or other transportation terminal
to provide ground transportation information services, dispatching service,
security services, traffic and parking control, or baggage handling.
 
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 days Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(a)(3) or revocation
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert
with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(b)   days or revocation
 
   (c)   Deliberate Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(c)   days or revocation
 
   (d)   Deliberate Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(d)   days or revocation
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(e)   days
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(f)   days or revocation
 
   (g)   Notice of Criminal Conviction. 
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission within 15 calendar days after
any felony conviction of the Licensee or of any of Licensee's officers or
members.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-10(g)
 
   (h)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Licensee must cooperate
with all law enforcement officers and all authorized representatives of the
Commission. Cooperation includes, but is not limited to, responding to a
request for the Licensee's name, License number, and any documents Licensee is
required to have in his or her possession.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(h)
 
   (i)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission. 
      (1)   A Licensee must truthfully answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives.
      (2)   Within five business days following a request from the Commission,
a Licensee must produce any Licenses or other documents the Licensee is
required to have.
      (3)   Licensee must aid the Commission in obtaining information it seeks
regarding Drivers or Vehicles affiliated with the Licensee.
 
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59D-10(i)(1)-(3)
 
      (4)   Within 48 hours, a Licensee must respond to any contact from the
Commission, seven days a week.
 
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-10(i)(4)
 
   (j)   Courtesy. A Licensee must be courteous to Passengers.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-10(j)
 
   (k)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-10(k)
 
   (l)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not retaliate against any
Driver for making a good faith complaint against any High-Volume For-Hire
Service.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
            for losses for the first violation and a
35 RCNY §  fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-10(l)   driver for any subsequent violation
            committed within five years of the first
            violation.
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 59D-11 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Alcohol and Drug Laws. A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner must not
knowingly allow a Base through which it dispatches trips to dispatch a For-Hire
Vehicle to be operated by a Driver who is under the influence of any drugs or
alcohol or whose driving ability is in any way impaired.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
59D-11(a)
 
   (b)   Disability Laws. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not instruct, authorize, or
permit an affiliated Driver to discriminate unlawfully against People with
Disabilities.
      (2)   Discrimination includes:
         (i)   Refusing to serve People with Disabilities,
         (ii)   Refusing to load and unload the mobility aids of People with
Disabilities,
         (iii)   Charge any more than the set rate for the transportation of
People with Disabilities, or their Service Animals, wheelchairs, or other
mobility aids.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-11(b)   days or revocation
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-12 Operations – Business Premises.
   (a)   Maintenance of Physical Location. A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner
must maintain a principal place of business in a commercially zoned area.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension until requirement is met. Appearance REQUIRED
59D-12(a)
 
   (b)   Application to Move Location. A High-Volume For-Hire Service that
moves to a new location must apply to the Commission for approval of the new
location prior to moving to the new location.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension of License. Appearance REQUIRED
59D-12(b)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-13 Operations – Service Requirements (Customers).
   (a)   Customer Complaints. A High-Volume For-Hire Service will be
responsible for handling customer complaints and must provide any information
requested by the Chairperson regarding such complaints.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-13(a)
 
   (b)   Provide Accessible Transportation. A High-Volume For-Hire Service's
passenger-facing booking tool must allow prospective Passengers to request a
wheelchair accessible vehicle.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
59D-13(b)
 
   (c)   Vehicle requirements. Each High-Volume For-Hire Service must dispatch
to vehicles in accordance with the following:
      (1)   In each of the following years, each High-Volume For-Hire Service
must dispatch at least the following percentage of trips to either a Zero-
Emission Vehicle or an Accessible Vehicle:
         (i)   2024: five percent (5%).
         (ii)   2025: fifteen percent (15%).
         (iii)   2026: twenty-five percent (25%).
         (iv)   2027: forty percent (40%).
         (v)   2028: sixty percent (60%).
         (vi)   2029: eighty percent (80%).
         (vii)   2030: one-hundred percent (100%).
 
             Fine: $50 for each 1,000 trips below the
             percentage requirement in that calendar year.
             If a High-Volume For-Hire Service does not
             fulfill the requirement in a calendar year,
35 RCNY §   the High-Volume For-Hire Service must file a   Appearance REQUIRED
59D-13(c)(1) corrective action plan for approval by the
             Commission. The corrective action plan must
             outline the steps the High-Volume For-Hire
             Service will take to meet its percentage
             requirements for the following calendar years.
 
      (2)   The above percentages will be calculated by adding the number of
trips dispatched to, and completed by, a Zero-Emission Vehicle or Accessible
Vehicle during the calendar year by the High-Volume For-Hire Service, and
dividing the sum by the total number of trips dispatched by the High-Volume
For-Hire Service in that calendar year.
      (3)   Nothing in this subdivision shall be construed to alter the
requirements of subdivision (c) of 35 RCNY §
59B-17 or subdivision (f) of such section.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 10/30/2023, eff. 11/29/2023)
§ 59D-14 Operations – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Required Information. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must collect and
transmit on a bi-weekly basis to the Commission, in a format, layout and
procedure prescribed by the Commission, the following records:
      (1)   With respect to all trips the High-Volume For-Hire Service
dispatches:
         (i)   The date, the time, and the location of the Passenger pickup and
drop-off
         (ii)   The Driver's TLC Driver License number
         (iii)   The dispatched Vehicle's License number
         (iv)   The TLC License number of the For-Hire Base that dispatched the
Vehicle
         (v)   The TLC License number of the For-Hire Base affiliated to the
dispatched Vehicle
         (vi)   The total number of passengers picked up and dropped off
         (vii)   The total trip mileage
         (viii)   The date and time the Passenger requested the trip
         (ix)   The itemized fare for the trip including the amount of the
fare, any toll, surcharge, commission rate, other deduction and any gratuity
and a breakdown of the amount such passenger paid for the trip
         (x)   The payment the Driver received for the trip or the Driver's
hourly paid rate
         (xi)   If the trip enters the Congestion Zone but the pick-up did not
occur in the Congestion Zone, the date, time, and location (latitude,
longitude, and human-readable street address) of the point at which the vehicle
entered the Congestion Zone and, if applicable, the date, time, and location
(latitude, longitude, and human-readable street address) of the point at which
the vehicle exited the Congestion Zone
         (xii)   An indicator as to whether the trip was administered as part
of the MTA's Access-A-Ride program, and
         (xiii)   the time at which the dispatched Vehicle reached the pickup
location.
      (2)   For each time a Vehicle makes itself available to be dispatched by
the High-Volume For-Hire Service:
         (i)   The Vehicle License number
         (ii)   The TLC Driver License number of the Driver operating the
Vehicle
         (iii)   The date and time at which the Vehicle became available to
accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service
         (iv)   The geographic position of the Vehicle during the entire time
the Vehicle is available to accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire
Service at intervals no less frequent than every sixty (60) seconds, with a
designation of the Vehicle status at each geographic position and the distance
traveled since the previous geographic position
         (v)   The date and time at which the Vehicle became unavailable to
accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service, or was prevented from
becoming available, with a designation of the reason for the Vehicle
unavailability including failure to meet licensure requirements, violation of
TLC rules, violation of company rules or policies, and supply management
         (vi)   If the Vehicle enters the Congestion Zone while available to
accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service, the date, time, and
location (latitude, longitude, and human-readable street address) of the point
at which the Vehicle entered the Congestion Zone and, if applicable, the date,
time, and location (latitude, longitude, and human-readable street address) of
the point at which the Vehicle exited the Congestion Zone.
      (3)   The amount of time spent transporting passengers each day by each
Vehicle that has made itself available to be dispatched by the High-Volume For-
Hire Service, and the amount of time spent by such Vehicles between trips but
not on the way to the passenger,
      (4)   The amount of time each Available Vehicle spends each day in the
Congestion Zone, and
      (5)   The amount of time each Available Vehicle spends each day Cruising
in the Congestion Zone.
 
                 Fine: $500 for each day past the date
                 the records are due if plead guilty
                 before a hearing and suspension until
35 RCNY §       compliance; $1,000 for each day past
59D-14(a)(1)-(5) the date the records are due if found Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                 guilty following a hearing and
                 suspension until compliance. Fine
                 amount not to exceed $10,000 per bi-
                 weekly submission of records.
 
   (6)   Timely Submission of Trip Records. 
      (i)   A High Volume For-Hire Service must submit trip records on a bi-
weekly basis. The following penalties accrue with respect to each submission of
trip records that were not submitted on time:
 
             Fine: $500 for each day past the date the
             records are due if plead guilty before a
             hearing and suspension until compliance;
35 RCNY §   $1,000 for each day past the date the      Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-14(a)(6) records are due if found guilty following
             a hearing and suspension until compliance.
             Fine amount not to exceed $10,000 per bi-
             weekly submission of records.
 
   (7)   Incomplete Trip Records. With respect to all trip records submitted to
TLC:
      (i)   Each set of submitted records must be complete and include all
information listed in this subdivision and in subdivision (b) of this section.
The following penalties accrue with respect to each trip for which all required
information was not submitted.
 
                Fine: $100 per incomplete trip record
                for the first ten incomplete records
35 RCNY §      and suspension until compliance; $500
59D-14(a)(7)(i) per each incomplete record thereafter Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                and suspension until compliance. Fine
                amount not to exceed $10,000 per bi-
                weekly submission of records.
 
   (8)   Inaccurate Trip Records. With respect to all trip records submitted to
TLC:
      (i)   The records that each Base submits for any time period in which
they dispatch trips must not contain inaccuracies. For example, the date, time
and location of the passenger pick-up that is required by paragraph (1) of this
subdivision must be accurate.
 
                Fine: $100 per trip record inaccuracy
                for the first ten inaccuracies and
35 RCNY §      suspension until compliance; $500 per
59D-14(a)(8)(i) inaccuracy thereafter and suspension    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                until compliance. Fine amount not to
                exceed $10,000 per bi-weekly submission
                of records.
 
   (b)   Collection and Maintenance of Required Information. 
      (1)   All records related to the location of a Vehicle, including the
location at which a Vehicle enters and exits the Congestion Zone, must be
collected via an in-vehicle Global Positioning System enabled device.
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must ensure that all required
information listed above is kept and made available for inspection by
Commission representatives during regular business hours.
      (3)   Required trip records must be maintained by the High-Volume For-
Hire Service for 18 months.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
59D-14(b)   hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (c)   Special Trip Record Requirements for Minimum Driver Payments. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must collect and transmit to the
Commission on a bi-weekly basis, in a format, layout and procedure prescribed
by the Commission, the following information for each time a Driver is
available to accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service:
         (i)   The Driver's TLC Driver License number of the Driver who is
available to accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (ii)   The Vehicle Identification Number of the Vehicle operated by
the Driver specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
         (iii)   The date and time at which the Driver became available to
accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (iv)   The Vehicle License number of the Vehicle operated by the
Driver specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph.
         (v)   The geographic position of the Vehicle operated by the Driver
specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph during the entire time the
Driver is available to accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service
at an interval of no less frequent than every sixty (60) seconds.
         (vi)   The date, time and geographic position of the Vehicle operated
by the Driver specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph when the Driver
accepts a dispatch.
         (vii)   Total miles driven by the Driver specified in subparagraph (i)
of this paragraph while the Driver was available to accept dispatches from the
High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (viii)   Total miles driven with a Passenger while the Driver
specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph was available to accept
dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (ix)   The date and time at which the Driver specified in subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph became unavailable to accept dispatches from the High-
Volume For-Hire Service.
         (x)   An indicator as to whether the Driver specified in subparagraph
(i) of this paragraph or the Base made the Driver unavailable to accept
dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (xi)   The total Driver earnings paid to the Driver specified in
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph for the period in which the Driver was
available to accept dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
         (xii)   The date and time at which the Driver specified in
subparagraph (i) of this paragraph arrived at the pick-up location of a
dispatched trip.
         (xiii)   The date and time at which a Passenger entered the Vehicle
operated by the Driver specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph to
commence the dispatched trip.
         (xiv)   The date and time at which a Passenger exited the Vehicle
operated by the Driver specified in subparagraph (i) of this paragraph to
conclude the dispatched trip.
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must collect and transmit to the
Commission on a bi-weekly basis, in a format, layout and procedure prescribed
by the Commission, for each Driver to which the High-Volume For-Hire Service
dispatched a trip, a weekly statement of the Driver's total earnings, itemized
to include any deductions made from the Driver's earnings and any payments made
in addition to per-trip or hourly payments.
      (3)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must collect and transmit to the
Commission on a bi-weekly basis, in a format, layout and procedure prescribed
by the Commission, the following additional information with respect to all
dispatched calls:
         (i)   The itemized fare for the trip charged to the Passenger (fare,
tolls, taxes, gratuity, commission rate, deductions and surcharges);
         (ii)   The total number of Passengers picked up and dropped off during
each dispatched call referenced in paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of this
section;
         (iii)   The total trip mileage for each dispatched call referenced in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of this section;
         (iv)   The total trip mileage outside of the limits of the City for
each dispatched call referenced in .paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of this
section;
         (v)   The total trip time outside of the limits of the City for each
dispatched call referenced in .paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of this
section;
         (vi)   The date and time such trip request was made by a Passenger;
         (vii)   Instances where a Passenger makes multiple requests for a
single, completed trip, the date and time of the latest such request;
         (viii)   Instances where a trip is requested but not completed
because:
            A.   The Passenger canceled the request, the Date, time and Vehicle
location when the passenger canceled the request.
            B.   The Passenger failed to show up for the requested trip, the
Date and time at which the Driver canceled the request due to lack of passenger
at pick-up location.
            C.   The Driver canceled the request, the Date, time and Vehicle
location when the Driver canceled the request.
            D.   No Driver accepted the trip after the trip was requested.
         (ix)   The total trip time, as calculated as the time between when the
Passenger entered the vehicle and when the Passenger exited the vehicle;
         (x)   The total time between trips for the same Driver, as calculated
as the time between when the prior trip ends and when the Driver receives
dispatch for the subsequent trip;
         (xi)   For trips dispatched to Drivers paid on a per-trip basis by the
High-Volume For-Hire Service, the total Driver earnings paid to the Driver for
each trip;
         (xii)   For trips dispatched to Drivers paid on an hourly basis, the
total Driver earnings paid to the Driver for each hour the Driver was available
to receive dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/12/2019,
eff. 8/12/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City
Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025; amended City Record 7/2/2025, eff. 8/1/2025)
§ 59D-15 Operations – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   High-Volume For-Hire Service Name. 
      (1)   File with Commission. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must file with
the Commission a High-Volume For-Hire Service name and any public facing name
it uses in its branding, operations, promotions or advertising as its trade,
business or operating names.
      (2)   Only One Name. 
         (i)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must use only one name in its
operations, including in its branding, operations, promotion and advertising
activities.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-15(a)
 
   (b)   Mailing and Email Address. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner must file the address of its
business with the Commission.
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner must have a working Email
Address on file with the Commission at all times.
      (3)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner must report any change of
Mailing Address or Email Address to the Commission in person or by mail within
ten days.
 
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-15(b)(1)-(3)
 
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner.
      (5)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner.
   (c)   Capacity for 24-Hour Access. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service Owner must maintain a current
telephone number on file with the Commission.
      (2)   This number must allow the Commission to reach the High-Volume For-
Hire Service on a 24-hour basis.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-15(c)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 59D-16 Operations – Additional Records to be Maintained and Reported.
   (a)   Maintenance of Current Rate Schedule. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must file with its Application and
maintain a Rate Schedule with the Commission, in a form approved by the
Chairperson. This Rate Schedule must include any lawful price multipliers or
variable pricing policies.
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Service's Rate Schedule must be consistent with
the Rate Schedules the Bases through which it dispatches trips have on file
with the Commission.
      (3)   A new Rate Schedule must be filed:
         (i)   Whenever rates are changed,
         (ii)   Annually, no later than the anniversary date of the License,
         (iii)   With every renewal application, and
         (iv)   With any application to change the Ownership of the High-Volume
For-Hire Service.
      (4)   Failure to file a Rate Schedule with a renewal application or an
application to change Ownership or location will result in denial of the
application by the Chairperson.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-16(a)
 
   (b)   Hours of Operation. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must file with the
Chairperson its hours of operations and must notify the Chairperson of any
change in the hours of operation.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-16(b)
 
   (c)   Public Access Information. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must file with the Chairperson all
contact information made available to or offered to the public for purposes of
pre-arranging transportation for hire, including but not limited to telephone
numbers, smartphone applications, websites, and email addresses.
      (2)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must file with the Chairperson a
working customer service telephone number and/or email address.
      (3)   These telephone numbers, smartphone applications, websites, email
addresses, and other contact information and methods can be used only with the
name of the High-Volume For-Hire Service on file with the Commission or the
trade, business or operating name of the High-Volume For-Hire Service.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-16(c)
 
   (d)   Eligible Drivers and Affiliated Vehicles. A High-Volume For-Hire
Service must report to the Commission on a monthly basis the following
information:
      (1)   A list of all Drivers eligible to receive dispatches from the High-
Volume For-Hire Service in the previous month, including the Drivers' TLC
License number
      (2)   A list of all Drivers that became ineligible to receive dispatches
from the High-Volume For-Hire Service in the previous month, including the
Drivers' TLC License number, the date on which the Drivers became ineligible to
receive dispatches, and an indicator as to whether the ineligibility to receive
dispatches was Driver or High-Volume For-Hire Service initiated.
      (3)   With respect to all affiliated Vehicles:
         (i)   The Owner's name, mailing address, and home telephone number.
         (ii)   The Vehicle Identification Number of the affiliated Vehicle.
         (iii)   The affiliated Vehicle's registration number.
         (iv)   The affiliated Vehicle's License number.
         (v)   The affiliated Vehicle's license plate number.
         (vi)   The name of the affiliated Vehicle's insurance carrier and the
policy number.
         (vii)   The dates of inspection of the affiliated Vehicle and the
outcome of each inspection.
   (e)   Compliance with all Record Keeping Rules. A High-Volume For-Hire
Service must comply with all record-keeping procedures established and required
by the Commission.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-16(d)   $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (f)   Information Security and Use of Personal Information Policy. The High-
Volume For-Hire Service must file with the Commission a current, detailed
information security and use of personal information policy. Such policy must
include, at a minimum:
      (1)   a statement of internal access policies relating to passenger and
driver personal information for employees, contractors, and third party access,
if applicable;
      (2)   a statement that, except to the extent necessary to provide credit,
debit, and prepaid card services and services for any application that provides
for electronic payment, personal information will only be collected and used
with such passenger's affirmative express consent and that such personal
information will not be used, shared, or disclosed, except for lawful purposes;
      (3)   procedures for notifying the Commission and affected parties of any
breach of the security of the system, pursuant to section 899-aa of the General
Business Law;
      (4)   a statement that any credit, debit, or prepaid card information
collected by the High-Volume For-Hire Service or a credit, debit, or prepaid
card services provider is processed by the High-Volume For-Hire Service or such
provider in compliance with applicable payment card industry standards, and;
      (5)   a statement of the High-Volume For-Hire Service's policies
regarding the use of passenger geolocation information, which must include, at
a minimum, a prohibition on the use, monitoring, or disclosure of trip
information, including the date, time, pick-up location, drop-off location, and
real-time vehicle location and any retained vehicle location records, without
such passenger's affirmative express consent.
   (g)   Compliance with Information Security and Use of Personal Information
Policy. The High-Volume For-Hire Service must comply with the terms of its
Information Security and Use of Personal Information Policy.
   (h)   Security Breach. If the High-Volume For-Hire Service is required to
make disclosures under New York State or Federal law regarding security
breaches, including the New York State Information Security Breach and
Notification Act (General Business Law § 899-aa), the Base Owner must inform
the Commission immediately following such disclosure(s).
 
 
35 RCNY §        Penalty: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
59D-16(g) and (h)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59D-17 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Rates Must Not Exceed Scheduled Rates. A High-Volume For-Hire Service
must not quote or charge a fare that is more than the fare listed in the Rate
Schedule filed with the Commission.
 
 
            Fine: $200 for Passenger overcharge,
35 RCNY §  whether from any quote or from schedule of Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-17(a)   fares required to be filed with the
            Commission.
 
   (b)   Tips and Gratuities. A High-Volume For-Hire Service's Passenger-Facing
Booking Tool must provide a means to allow passengers to tip Drivers. A High-
Volume For-Hire Service must remit to the Driver the entirety of anything
designated as a tip or gratuity collected by the High-Volume For-Hire Service
from a customer on behalf of the Driver.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-17(b)
 
   (c)   Tolls. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must remit to the Driver the
entirety of any toll paid by the Driver during a dispatched trip.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and restitution to the Driver
59D-17(c)   for any tolls that were not properly     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            reimbursed.
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59D-18 Operations – E-ZPass Required.
   (a)   E-ZPass. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not dispatch a Vehicle
unless the Vehicle is participating in the E-ZPass program.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-18(a)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021)
§ 59D-19 Operations – Compliance with Licensing Statements.
   (a)   Compliance with Business Plan. A High-Volume Service must adhere to
the Business Plan it filed with the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59D-05(b). Any deviation from the Business Plan must be approved by the
Commission prior to implementation.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
59D-19(a)
 
   (b)   Corrective Action Plan. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must comply
with any corrective action plan approved by the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY
§
59D-05(c)(1) and 35 RCNY §
59D-13(c).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
59D-19(b)
 
   (c)   Driver Deductions and Fee. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not
charge a Driver or Vehicle Owner a fee or deduction not specifically listed in
its statement of fees on file with the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59D-05(d).
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
59D-19(c)
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/20211; amended City Record 10/30/2023, eff. 11/29/2023)
§ 59D-20 Operations – Miscellaneous Operating Requirements.
   (a)   Prohibited Use of "Taxi." A High-Volume For-Hire Service must not hold
itself out for business as a "taxi" or "taxicab" service or in any way use the
word "taxi," "taxicab," "cab," "hack," or "coach" to describe the business.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-20(a)
 
   (b)   Advertising of Commission License. 
      (1)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must clearly state that it is
licensed by the Commission in all Passenger-facing advertising, whether print,
broadcast, electronic or Internet, and in all handbills, fliers, websites,
smartphone applications, or other promotional materials and on all business
cards and receipts.
      (2)   All of the advertising and materials listed in paragraph (1) of
this subdivision must include the High-Volume For-Hire Service License number.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-20(b)
 
   (c)   Passenger Complaint Notification. Upon receipt of a complaint related
to a Driver, a High-Volume For-Hire Service must provide the Passenger with the
"311" Commission complaint telephone number and inform the Passenger that only
the TLC can suspend or revoke a Driver's TLC License.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-20(c)
 
   (d)   Receipts. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must provide a Passenger a
receipt for a trip containing the following information:
      (1)   The Dispatching Base License number;
      (2)   Vehicle License number;
      (3)   Vehicle's affiliated Base License number;
      (4)   Driver's TLC License number;
      (5)   Total amount due;
      (6)   Itemized fees charged (if any) including any price multiplier or
variable pricing policy in effect for the trip;
      (7)   The "311" Commission complaint telephone number; and
      (8)   The public access information the Base has on file with the
Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59D-16.
   (e)   No Other For-Hire Base Licenses. A High-Volume For-Hire Service shall
not hold any For-Hire Base License other than a High-Volume For-Hire Service
License. Once a Black Car Base, Livery Base, or Luxury Limousine Base is
required to and obtains a High-Volume For-Hire Service license, the Commission
shall revoke all For-Hire Base Licenses other than a High Volume For-Hire
Service License from any High-Volume For-Hire Service.
   (f)   Business Requirements – Interior Advertising Systems. 
      (1)   Nondiscrimination. No High-Volume For-Hire Service may discriminate
against or impose any negative consequences on a Driver based on whether or not
the Driver chooses to operate a For-Hire Vehicle with an Interior Advertising
System, or based on the brand or affiliation of the Interior Advertising
System. Negative consequences and/or discrimination include but are not limited
to: deactivating the Driver, reducing the compensation provided to the Driver,
either directly or indirectly through manipulating the number or type of rides
assigned to the Driver, or disciplinary action.
      (2)   Passenger-Facing Content. If a High Volume For-Hire Service is
integrated with an Interior Advertising System, 15% of the advertising airtime
must be calculated based upon each new dispatched trip.
      (3)   Tipping. If a High Volume For-Hire Service is integrated with an
Interior Advertising System, gratuities facilitated through the Approved Tablet
must be paid to the Driver through the payment mechanisms provided in
Chapter 59B of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59. A High Volume For-Hire Service cannot integrate with an Interior
Advertising System capable of collecting payment information from a Passenger
through any tablet.
 
            Penalty:
35 RCNY §  First Violation: $1,000 fine               Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59D-20(f)   Second Violation: $1,000 and/or Suspension
            for up to 30 days
 
(Added City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 6/30/2021,
eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59D-21 Operations – Restrictions on Cruising Time in the Manhattan Core.
   (a)   Cruising in the Congestion Zone. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must
limit the total amount of time Available Vehicles spend Cruising while in the
Congestion Zone in the following manner:
      (1)   Beginning February 1, 2020, the percentage of time all Available
Vehicles spend Cruising while in the Congestion Zone between the hours of six
a.m. and eleven p.m. on Monday through Friday and between the hours of eight
a.m. and eleven p.m. on Saturday and Sunday cannot exceed thirty-six percent
(36%).
      (2)   Beginning August 1, 2020, the percentage of time all Available
Vehicles spend Cruising while in the Congestion Zone between the hours of six
a.m. and eleven p.m. on Monday through Friday and between the hours of eight
a.m. and eleven p.m. on Saturday and Sunday cannot exceed thirty-one percent
(31%).
 
            Fine: $350 for each 100 hours by which the
            High-Volume For-Hire Service exceeds the limit
            on the percentage of time Available Vehicles
            can spend Cruising while in the Congestion Zone
            in the previous calendar month.

            Example: If Available Vehicles spent 2,500,000
35 RCNY §  hours in the Congestion Zone over the course of
59D-21(a)   March 2020 but spent 925,000 of those hours     Appearance REQUIRED
            Cruising, the High-Volume For-Hire Service will
            have exceeded the 36% limitation on Cruising by
            25,000 hours and be subject to a $87,500 fine.

            If a High-Volume For-Hire Service exceeds the
            Cruising limits outlined above by over 10%, the
            Commission may seek suspension of up to 30 days
            or revocation.
 
   (b)   Calculating Cruising Time. Cruising time will be calculated as all the
time a High-Volume For-Hire Service's Available Vehicles spend in the
Congestion Zone without a passenger.
      (1)   Concurrent Availability. When a Vehicle is available to accept
dispatches from more than one High-Volume For-Hire Service, its Cruising time
will be assigned proportionately based on the aggregate Congestion Zone trip
volumes of each High-Volume For-Hire Service from which the Vehicle is
available to accept dispatches. For example, if during a compliance period a
Vehicle spends 10 hours Cruising in the Congestion Zone while available to
accept dispatches from Company A and Company B, and during that compliance
period Company A dispatches 800,000 trips in the Congestion Zone and Company B
dispatches 200,000 trips in the Congestion Zone, 8 hours of the Vehicle's
Cruising time will be assigned to Company A and 2 hours of the Vehicle's
Cruising time will be assigned to Company B.
      (2)   En Route Time. For purposes of paragraph (1) above, the portion of
a Vehicle's Cruising time spent driving to a Passenger's pick-up location after
a Vehicle accepts a dispatch request will be exclusively assigned to the High-
Volume For-Hire Service that dispatched the trip. For example, if a Vehicle
spends 10 hours Cruising in the Congestion Zone while available to accept
dispatches from Company A and Company B, and during those 10 hours, 2 hours
were spent driving to pick-up locations for trips dispatched by Company A and 3
hours were spent driving to pick-up locations for trips dispatched by Company
B, 2 hours of the Vehicle's Cruising time will be assigned to Company A, 3
hours of the Vehicle's Cruising time will be assigned to Company B, and the
remaining 5 hours will be assigned proportionately between Company A and
Company B pursuant to the method described in paragraph (1) above.
      (3)   Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Exemption. The Commission will not
include a High-Volume For-Hire Service's Available Vehicles that are Wheelchair
Accessible when calculating the High-Volume For-Hire Service's Cruising time.
   (c)   Evaluation by the Commission. No less than annually, the Commission
will review compliance levels, service levels outside the Congestion Zone, and
any other information it deems relevant to determine if adjustments need to be
made to the limits on Cruising set forth in subdivision (a) of this section.
(Added City Record 8/12/2019, eff. 8/12/2019)
§ 59D-22 Minimum Driver Payment Requirements.
   (a)   A High-Volume For-Hire Service must pay Drivers, at a minimum, the
following amounts for each trip dispatched by the Base:
      (1)   Per Mile Rate. For each mile a Driver transports a Passenger in the
City on a trip dispatched by the High-Volume For-Hire Service, the High-Volume
For-Hire Service must pay the Driver no less than $0.850 per mile for a trip
dispatched to a Vehicle that is not an Accessible Vehicle and $1.061 for a trip
dispatched to an Accessible Vehicle, divided by the High-Volume For-Hire
Service's Utilization Rate, and for trips that begin in the City but end
outside of the City, the Base must pay the Driver no less than $1.700 per mile
for a trip dispatched to a vehicle that is not an Accessible Vehicle and no
less than $2.122 per mile for a trip dispatched to an Accessible Vehicle for
each mile a Driver transports a Passenger outside of the City; and
      (2)   Per Minute Rate. Beginning January 1, 2019, for each minute a
Driver transports a Passenger in the City on a trip dispatched by the High-
Volume For-Hire Service, the High-Volume For-Hire Service must pay the Driver
no less than $0.287 per minute, divided by the High-Volume For-Hire Service's
Utilization Rate, and for each minute a Driver transports a Passenger outside
of the City on a trip dispatched by the High-Volume For-Hire Service that began
in the City and ended outside of the City, the High-Volume For-Hire Service
must pay the Driver no less than $0.574 per minute.
      (3)   [Reserved.]
      (4)   Consumer Price Index Adjustments. Beginning March 1, 2024 and
continuing each calendar year thereafter, the dollar amounts in the per mile
rates and per minute rates contained in this subdivision will be adjusted using
the percent increases, if any, in the annual average Consumer Price Index for
Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers for the NY-NJ-PA metro area between the
previous calendar year and two calendar years prior. The Consumer Price Index
adjusted per mile and per minute rates will be posted on the Commission's
website.
      (5)   Hourly Payments. If a High-Volume For-Hire Service pays drivers on
an hourly basis, the payment the Driver receives for each hour the Driver
accepts dispatches from the High-Volume For-Hire Service must be at least the
sum of the Per Mile Rate for all miles the Driver transported Passengers during
the hour and the Per Minute Rate for all minutes the Driver spent transporting
Passengers during the hour.
 
            Fine: $500 per instance of under payment. In
            addition to the penalty payable to the
35 RCNY §  Commission, the Hearing Officer must order the  Appearance REQUIRED
59D-22(a)   High-Volume For-Hire Service to pay restitution
            to the Driver, equal to the amount not paid to
            the Driver in violation of this rule.
 
   (b)   Applied Utilization Rate. The applied Utilization Rate for purposes of
calculating the per-minute rate for all High-Volume For-Hire Services will be
53.3%. The applied Utilization Rate for purposes of calculating the per-mile
rate for all High-Volume For-Hire Services will be 68.5%.
   (c)   Driver Access to High-Volume For-Hire Service Applications. 
      (1)   Notice Requirement. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must provide at
least 72 hours’ notice to any Driver who could otherwise make themselves
available to accept dispatches from that High-Volume For-Hire Service on a
calendar day if such High-Volume For-Hire Service will restrict that Driver’s
ability to accept dispatches on that calendar day.
      (2)   Access Requirement. A High-Volume For-Hire Service must allow any
Driver who has made themselves available to accept dispatches to continue to be
available to accept dispatches for at least 16 hours following their initial
availability. If a Driver has not been available to accept dispatches for at
least eight consecutive hours, the 16-hour access period restarts.
      (3)   Exceptions. A High-Volume For-Hire Service may restrict a Driver’s
ability to accept dispatches, without 72 hours’ notice, for lack of licensing
credentials, violation of TLC rules, and violation of the High-Volume For-Hire
Service’s rules and policies including misconduct and excessive cancellation or
non-acceptance of dispatches.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 per failure to provide notice or Appearance REQUIRED
59D-22(c)   failure to allow Driver access.
 
(Added City Record 6/30/2021, eff. 7/30/2021; amended City Record 3/13/2023,
eff. 3/13/2023; amended City Record 7/2/2025, eff. 8/1/2025; amended City
Record 9/22/2025, eff. 9/22/2025)
Subchapter 59E: Interior Advertising Providers
§ 59E-01 Scope of the Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish a formal procedure for the licensing and supervision of
businesses that own, sell, lease, make available for use, provide or supply
approved electronic tablets and software for interior advertising in for-hire
vehicles.
   (b)   To establish technical requirements for tablets and software and
provide for the issuance of licenses to Interior Advertising Providers whose
systems meet such requirements.
   (c)   To establish services to be provided by Interior Advertising
Providers.
   (d)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these rules.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity. 
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated service by:
         (A)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed; or
         (B)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License from the Commission
for interior advertising.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
35 RCNY §
59E-08 and can result in License revocation, and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. Specific penalties for violating a Rule will be
shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty provision will also state whether the
violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines. 
      (1)   Fines are due within thirty (30) days of the day the Respondent is
found guilty of the violation, unless the Respondent files an appeal of the
decision issued by the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings within the
time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Non-renewal, Suspension or Revocation of License. 
      (1)   Non-renewal of License. If an Interior Advertising Provider License
is not timely renewed, the Interior Advertising Provider must immediately
notify:
         (A)   the Commission, specifying the date of License expiration; and
         (B)   each Driver who is using the Approved Tablets under the expired
License.
      Upon expiration of the Interior Advertising Provider License, the
Interior Advertising Provider must not enter into any new contracts or
agreements with Drivers for Gross Revenue sharing, sale, lease or use of the
Approved Tablets under the expired License, and must not renew existing
contracts with Drivers who are using the Approved Tablets under the expired
License.
      (2)   Suspension. While the Interior Advertising Provider's License is
suspended, the Interior Advertising Provider must not enter into any new
contracts or agreements with Drivers for Gross Revenue sharing, sale, lease or
use of any Approved Tablets under the suspended License. If an Interior
Advertising Provider License has been suspended by the Commission for a period
of at least thirty (30) days, the Interior Advertising Provider must
immediately notify, in writing, each Driver who is using an Approved Tablet
under the suspended License, as well as the Driver's affiliated Base:
         (A)   of the dates during which the License is suspended;
         (B)   that the Driver has the option to terminate its contract or
agreement with the Interior Advertising Provider by providing written notice to
the Interior Advertising Provider, or if its contract will expire during the
period of suspension that Driver has the option not to renew its contract;
         (C)   that the Driver must immediately stop operating the Approved
Tablet and immediately remove the Approved Tablet from the For-Hire Vehicle;
         (D)   that the Driver is entitled to any payments for contracted or
agreed upon services with the Interior Advertising Provider up until the
suspension date, regardless of whether the Driver exercises the option to renew
or terminates the contract or agreement.
      (3)   Revocation. 
         (A)   If an Interior Advertising Provider's License has been revoked
by the Commission, the Interior Advertising Provider must immediately notify,
in writing, each Driver who is using an Approved Tablet under the revoked
License, as well as the Driver's affiliated Base:
            (i)   that its contract or agreement with the Interior Advertising
Provider will be deemed terminated ten (10) days following the date of License
revocation, and
            (ii)   that its contract or agreement may be terminated earlier by
the Driver by giving written notice of termination.
         (B)   Upon revocation of the Interior Advertising Provider's License,
the Interior Advertising Provider must not:
            (i)   enter into any new contracts or agreements with Drivers for
Gross Revenue sharing, sale, lease or use of an Approved Tablet under the
revoked License; or
            (ii)   renew existing contracts or agreements with Drivers who are
using any Approved Tablets under the revoked License.
         (C)   An Interior Advertising Provider whose License has been revoked
must provide de-installation/removal at no charge to each Driver who used an
Approved Tablet under the revoked License.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 - $1,500 fine. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59E-02(d)
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant means an Applicant for an original or renewal Interior
Advertising Provider License.
   (b)   Electronic Media means any broadcasted content on Electronic Tablets.
   (c)   Gross Revenue means the revenue generated by the Interior Advertising
Provider.
   (d)   Identifying Information means any information that can be used to
identify or locate an individual, including but not limited to name, address,
social security number, unmasked or non-truncated credit, debit, or prepaid
card numbers, together with any other information that relates to an individual
who has been so identified, and any other information that is otherwise subject
to privacy or confidentiality laws and associated rules and regulations. The
display or disclosure of only the last four digits of a credit, debit, or
prepaid card number is not Personal Information. The name of a Driver and the
Driver's Commission license number is not Identifying Information.
   (e)   Interior Advertising Provider means a business that has been licensed
by the Commission and that owns, sells, leases, makes available for use,
provides or supplies Approved Electronic Tablets and Software for Interior
Advertising Systems in For-Hire Vehicles.
   (f)   Interior Advertising / Interior Advertising System is used
interchangeably in this subchapter – and in this subchapter ONLY – and means
any component of Hardware and/or Software used for interior advertising.
   (g)   License. When the term "License" is used by itself in this subchapter
– and in this subchapter ONLY – it means an Interior Advertising Provider
License.
   (h)   Licensee. When the term "Licensee" is used by itself, in this
subchapter – and in this subchapter ONLY – it means an Interior Advertising
Provider Licensee.
   (i)   Software / Approved Software is used interchangeably in this
subchapter and means all application functions and content on Electronic
Tablets / Hardware.
   (j)   Approved Tablet / Electronic Tablet / Approved Electronic Tablet /
Hardware is used interchangeably in this subchapter – and in this subchapter
ONLY – and means all Interior Advertising System hardware in For-Hire Vehicles.
   (k)   Update means all revisions, updates, patches, modifications,
corrections, releases, versions, fixes and enhancements to Software or Hardware
that is a component of the Interior Advertising System.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Licensees. An Applicant for an Interior Advertising Provider License
or its renewal may be an individual or a Business Entity.
   (b)   Approval of Tablet Model. Each model of Approved Tablet offered under
an Interior Advertising Provider's License must be approved by the Chairperson
prior to making it available for sale, lease, or use by Drivers.
   (c)   Certification. Any new or renewal application for an Interior
Advertising Provider License must be filed using a form approved by the
Chairperson. The Applicant must swear (or affirm) that the information in the
Application is true, under penalty of perjury.
   (d)   Proof of Identity. The individual or Business Entity Person submitting
the application for an Interior Advertising Provider License must provide to
the Commission:
      (1)   a valid form of photo identification issued by the United States, a
state or territory, or any political subdivision of a state or territory; and
      (2)   a valid social security number.
   (e)   Age. The individual or Business Entity Person applying for an Interior
Advertising Provider License or its renewal must be at least 18 years of age.
   (f)   Fit to Hold a License. The individual or Business Entity Person
applying for an Interior Advertising Provider License or its renewal must
demonstrate that they are Fit to Hold a License.
   (g)   Partnership Filings. When the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with the clerk of the county where the principal place of business is located.
In addition, each partner must satisfy the requirements of identity and age, as
specified in subdivisions (d) and (e) of this subdivision.
   (h)   Corporate or LLC Filings. When the Applicant is a corporation, it must
provide:
      (1)   current contact information for its principal officers and
shareholders, or that of an authorized representative of the principal
shareholders; and
      (2)   a valid EIN number.
   (i)   Payment of Fines and Fees. 
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines, taxes, or fees
owed by the Applicant to:
         (A)   the Commission;
         (B)   NYC Department of Finance;
         (C)   NYC Department of Consumer and Worker Protection;
         (D)   NYS Department of State; and
         (E)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau; or
         (F)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by:
         (A)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant;
         (B)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person; and
         (C)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (j)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address as required by 35 RCNY §
59E-13.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-05 Licensing – Specific Requirements.
   (a)   Approval for New License. The Commission will not issue an Interior
Advertising Provider License to any Applicant unless the Commission approves
the tablet and software proposed for in-vehicle use by the Applicant. In
determining whether to approve the Applicant, the Commission will consider, in
its sole discretion, whether the documentation required to be submitted by the
Applicant pursuant to subdivision (b) of this section adequately demonstrates
that the Applicant's Interior Advertising System complies with all of the
requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
59E-22.
   (b)   Documentation for Interior Advertising System Approval. The Applicant
must submit with its License application the following documentation for
tablets and software for which Commission approval is sought.
      (1)   A procedures manual/user guide that describes the features and
operations of the Interior Advertising System.
      (2)   Demonstration Models. 
         (A)   One working demonstration model of the Electronic Tablet and
Software, inclusive of all components required for complete functionality of
the Interior Advertising System.
         (B)   A second demonstration model installed in a vehicle for
demonstration purposes and to allow approval by the Commission of the
installation method and location of the Interior Advertising System. In its
decision to approve the location and installation of the Interior Advertising
System, the TLC will consider the safety of the Passenger, Passenger
ergonomics, the impact of modifications on the proper functioning of the
vehicle or other required equipment, and any comments provided by Interior
Advertising Providers and industry, passenger, or safety organizations.
      (3)   Interior Advertising System Training. Applicants must provide to
the personnel of the Commission or its designee, at no cost to the Commission,
training sessions on the functionality of the Interior Advertising System.
      (4)   Information Security and Use of Identifying Information Policy. The
Applicant must submit with its License application an information security and
use of Identifying Information policy that includes, at a minimum, the
following information:
         (A)   a statement of internal access policies relating to Identifying
Information for employees, contractors, and third parties, if applicable. Such
internal access policy must be limited only to those employees, contractors, or
third parties who have a business need to access Identifying Information;
Applicant must annually review and update internal access policies, or more
frequently as required by the Commission. Such internal access policies must be
made publicly available;
         (B)   compliance with Information Security and Use of Personal
Information Policy. The Interior Advertising Provider licensee or Applicant
must comply with the terms of its Information Security and Use of Personal
Information Policy;
         (C)   procedures for notifying the Commission and affected parties of
any breach of the security of the system, pursuant to section 899-aa of the
General Business Law;
         (D)   a statement of the Applicant's policies regarding the use of
passenger geolocation and Identifying Information, which must include, at a
minimum, a prohibition on the use, monitoring, or disclosure of trip
information, including the date, time, pick-up location, drop-off location, and
real-time vehicle location; and
         (E)   a statement of the Applicant's policies regarding the use of any
non-prohibited passenger information (e.g. generalized trip data, such as the
borough in which a ride begins and ends, or non-precise geolocation data within
a radius of approximately 3,600 feet, pursuant to the National Advertising
Institute).
   (c)   Modification of Interior Advertising System. The Interior Advertising
Provider must submit an application for approval of any material modification
of the Interior Advertising System, including all documentation required by
subdivision (b) of this section. This includes any modification to the Interior
Advertising System after the Commission has issued a License for such Interior
Advertiser that would materially alter the functionality, performance
characteristics, security measures, or technical environment of the Interior
Advertising System, and modifications of interfaces to other systems licensed
by the Commission.
   (d)   Interior Advertising System Approval Upon Renewal. If upon renewal of
the Interior Advertising Provider License:
      (1)   the Interior Advertising Provider seeks approval of a modification
of the Interior Advertising System, the Interior Advertising Provider must meet
all of the requirements applicable to a modification of the Interior
Advertising System pursuant to subdivision (c) of this section; or
      (2)   the Interior Advertising Provider does not seek approval of a
modification of the Interior Advertising System and there has been no
modification of the Interior Advertising System since the prior Commission
approval of the Interior Advertising Provider or prior Commission approval of a
modification of the Interior Advertising System, the Interior Advertising
Provider must submit to the Commission a certification to that effect.
   (e)   If the Approved Tablets and/or Approved Software is not functioning
properly, the Interior Advertising Provider must cease its operations with
respect to such Approved Tablets until such time as the Approved Tablets and/or
Approved Software are functioning properly.
   (f)   Required Insurance. After submission of an application for a new
Interior Advertising Provider License, an Applicant must provide to the
Commission proof of the insurance required in this subdivision when the
Commission requests it. Upon submission of an application to renew an Interior
Advertising Provider License, the Interior Advertising Provider Licensee must
provide to the Commission proof of the insurance required in this subdivision.
      (1)   Commercial General Liability Insurance. 
         (A)   The Applicant must maintain Commercial General Liability ("CGL")
Insurance covering the Applicant as Named Insured and the City as an Additional
Insured in the amount of at least Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000) per
occurrence. The insurance must protect the City and the Applicant from all
claims, including but not limited to claims for property damage and/or bodily
injury that may arise from any of the operations performed or to be performed
by or on behalf of the Applicant in connection with any of the activities
licensed under this subchapter. Coverage under this insurance must be at least
as broad as that provided by the most recently issued Insurance Services Office
("ISO") Form CG 0001 and must be "occurrence" based rather than "claims-made".
         (B)   If the Applicant's subcontractor(s) is/are performing or will
perform operations in connection with any of the activities licensed under this
subchapter, either the Applicant's CGL Insurance under subparagraph (A) of this
paragraph must cover the subcontractor(s) or such subcontractor(s) must
maintain its/their own CGL Insurance subject to all other requirements herein.
         (C)   The CGL Insurance must include the City, together with its
officials and employees, as an Additional Insured with coverage at least as
broad as the most recently issued ISO Form CG20 10.
      (2)   General Requirements for Insurance Coverage and Policies. 
         (A)   All required insurance policies must be maintained with
companies that may lawfully issue the required policy and have an A.M. Best
rating of at least A- / "VII" or a Standard and Poor's rating of at least A,
unless prior written approval is obtained from the Commission.
         (B)   All insurance policies must be primary (and non-contributing) to
any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the City.
         (C)   The Applicant must be solely responsible for the payment of all
premiums for all required insurance policies and all deductibles or self-
insured retentions to which the policies are subject, whether or not the City
is an insured under the policy.
         (D)   There must be no self-insurance program with regard to any
insurance required under this subdivision unless approved in writing by the
Commission. Any self-insurance program must provide the City with all rights
that would be provided by traditional insurance required under this
subdivision, including but not limited to the defense obligations that insurers
are required to undertake in liability policies.
         (E)   The City's limits of coverage for all types of insurance
required under this subdivision must be the greater of:
            (i)   the minimum limits set forth in this subdivision; or
            (ii)   the limits provided to the Applicant as Named Insured under
all primary, excess, and umbrella policies of that type of coverage.
      (3)   Proof of Insurance. 
         (A)   For each policy required under this subdivision, the Applicant
must file with the Commission a Certificate of Insurance issued by the insurer.
All Certificates of Insurance must be:
            (i)   in a form acceptable to the Commission and certify the
issuance and effectiveness of such policies of insurance, each with the
specified minimum limits;
            (ii)   accompanied by the endorsement in the Applicant's Commercial
General Liability Insurance policy by which the City has been made an
Additional Insured pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of this
subdivision; and
            (iii)   accompanied by either a duly executed "Certification by
Insurer" in the form provided by the Commission or copies of all policies
referenced in the Certificate of Insurance. If complete policies have not yet
been issued, binders are acceptable, until the complete policies have been
issued, at which time such policies must be submitted.
         (B)   The Applicant must provide the Commission with a copy of any
policy required under this subdivision upon demand by the Commission or the New
York City Law Department.
         (C)   Acceptance by the Commission of a Certificate of Insurance or a
Declarations Page or a policy does not excuse the Interior Advertising Provider
from maintaining policies consistent with all provisions of this subdivision
(and ensuring that subcontractors maintain such policies) or from any liability
arising from its failure to do so.
         (D)   If the Interior Advertising Provider receives notice, from an
insurance company or other person, that any insurance policy required under
this subdivision will expire, be cancelled, or terminated for any reason, the
Interior Advertising Provider must immediately forward a copy of the notice to
the Commission and the New York City Comptroller at:
            NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission
            Attn: General Counsel
            33 Beaver Street 22nd Floor
            New York, New York 10004
            New York City Comptroller
            Attn: Office of Contract Administration
            Municipal Building, One Centre Street, Room 1005
            New York, New York 10007.
      (4)   Miscellaneous Insurance Provisions. 
         (A)   Whenever notice of loss, damage, occurrence, accident, claim or
suit is required under a Commercial General Liability policy maintained in
accordance with this subdivision, the Interior Advertising Provider must
provide the insurer with timely notice thereof on behalf of the City. Notice
must be given even where the Interior Advertising Provider may not have
coverage under such policy (for example, where one of the Interior Advertising
Provider's employees was injured). Notice must expressly specify that "this
notice is being given on behalf of the City of New York as Additional Insured"
and contain the following information:
            • the number of the insurance policy;
            • the name of the named insured;
            • the date and location of the damage, occurrence, or accident;
            • the identity of the persons or things injured, damaged, or lost;
and
            • the title of the claim or suit, if applicable.
         The Interior Advertising Provider must simultaneously send a copy of
the notice to:
            The City of New York c/o Insurance Claims Specialist
            Affirmative Litigation Division,
            New York City Law Department,
            100 Church Street, New York, New York 10007
            Attn:   James Sanford, jsanford@law.nyc.gov
               Christopher Dickerson, cdickers@law.nyc.gov
         If the Interior Advertising Provider fails to comply with the
requirements of this subparagraph, the Interior Advertising Provider must
indemnify the City for all losses, judgments, settlements and expenses,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, arising from an insurer's disclaimer of
coverage citing late notice by or on behalf of the City.
         (B)   Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts required in this
subdivision shall not relieve the Interior Advertising Provider Licensee of any
liability for indemnification under this subchapter.
         (C)   The Interior Advertising Provider waives all rights against the
City, including its officers and employees, for any damages or losses that are
covered under any insurance required under this subdivision (whether or not
such insurance is actually procured or claims are paid under such insurance) or
any other insurance applicable to the activities of the Interior Advertising
Provider and/or its subcontractors required to be licensed under this
subchapter.
         (D)   If the Interior Advertising Provider requires any subcontractor
to procure insurance in connection with any of the activities licensed under
this subchapter and requires the subcontractor to include the Interior
Advertising Provider as an additional insured under such insurance, the
Interior Advertising Provider must ensure that such entity also names the City,
including its officials and employees, as an additional insured with coverage
at least as broad as the most recently issued ISO form CG 20 26.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
59E-05(f)   days or revocation.
 
   (g)   Renewals of Required Insurance Policies. The Interior Advertising
Provider must submit to the Commission Certificates of Insurance confirming
renewals of insurance before coverage of insurance policies required under
subdivision (f) of this section expires. Certificates of Insurance must comply
with the requirements of subparagraph (f)(3)(A) above.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-06 Licensing – Fees and Term of License.
   (a)   Application Fee. Every application for a new or renewal Interior
Advertising Provider License must be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of $500 annually for each License to be issued or renewed for
the term as provided in subdivision (c) of this section.
   (b)   Form of Payment. All application fees must be paid by credit card,
debit card, or electronic check.
   (c)   Term of License. The term of an Interior Advertising Provider License
will be three years
   (d)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least
sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 90 days
after the expiration date as a "late application." When a late application is
submitted, the License will remain expired until the application for renewal is
approved by the Commission. If an extended License renewal application is
approved, the renewal License expiration date will be based on the original
expiration date of the License and not the extended date.
      (3)   In order to renew an Interior Advertising Provider License, all
suspensions must be cleared.
   (e)   Suspended Licenses. If a License is suspended and it is also due to be
renewed, the Interior Advertising Provider must apply for renewal as required
in subdivision (d) above if the Interior Advertising Provider wants to renew
the License. Failure to complete the renewal requirements means that the
License cannot be renewed.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-07 Licensing – Cause for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Continuously Comply. Whenever the Commission determines
that the Interior Advertising Provider no longer meets the requirements for the
License, the Commission may suspend or revoke the License and deny any
application for renewal.
   (b)   Summary Suspension. Nothing in this section limits the authority of
the Commission to summarily suspend any Interior Advertising Provider License
when a threat to public health, safety, or welfare exists.
   (c)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements. 
      (1)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
ninety (90) days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
90 days after the expiration date of the current License.
   (d)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-08 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity.
Interior Advertising Provider License Required. An individual or Business
Entity must not do or attempt to do the following: sell, lease, make available
for use, install, maintain, service or repair an Approved Tablet in any
Commission-licensed vehicle, or enter into or renew a contract with a Driver
for the Gross Revenue sharing, sale, lease, use, installation, maintenance,
service or repair of any Approved Tablet without a Valid Interior Advertising
Provider License.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-08
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-09 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law.
   (a)   Licenses and Permits. An Interior Advertising Provider must obtain all
licenses and permits required by applicable local, state, or federal law for
such Interior Advertising Provider's business.
   (b)   Payment of All Fines and Fees. An Interior Advertising Provider must
pay all fines, fees, and taxes it owes to any federal, state, or local
governmental jurisdiction when they are due.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or Appearance REQUIRED
59E-09(a) & (b) suspension until compliance.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-10 General Requirements – Indemnification.
   (a)   General Indemnification. An Interior Advertising Provider must defend,
indemnify and hold the City, its officers and employees harmless from any and
all third-party claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are without
merit) or judgments for damages on account of any losses, including for
injuries or death to any person or damage to any property and from costs and
expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) to which the City, its officers
and employees may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly
arising out of any operations of the Interior Advertising Provider and/or its
employees, agents or subcontractors in connection with any of the activities
licensed under this sub-chapter to the extent resulting from any negligent act
of commission or omission, any intentional tortious act, or failure to comply
with any of the provisions of this sub-chapter. Insofar as the facts or law
relating to any third-party claim would preclude the City from being completely
indemnified by the Interior Advertising Provider, the City shall be partially
indemnified by the Interior Advertising Provider to the fullest extent
permitted by law.
   (b)   Infringement Indemnification. An Interior Advertising Provider must
defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all third-party
claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are without merit) or judgments
for damages and from costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees)
to which the City may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly
arising out of or in connection with any infringement by the Interior
Advertising Provider, its agents or subcontractors of any copyright, trade
secrets, trademark or patent rights or any other property or personal right of
any third party in the conduct of the licensed activities. Insofar as the facts
or law relating to any third-party claim would preclude the City from being
completely indemnified by the Interior Advertising Provider, the City shall be
partially indemnified by the Interior Advertising Provider to the fullest
extent permitted by law.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or Appearance REQUIRED
59E-10(a) & (b) suspension until compliance.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-11 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited.
   (a)   An Interior Advertising Provider must not use or permit any other
person to use its business premises or office of record for any unlawful
purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-11(a)   up to 30 days or revocation.
 
   (b)   An Interior Advertising Provider must not conceal any evidence of a
crime or violation connected with its business premises or office of record.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-11(b)   up to 30 days or revocation.
 
   (c)   An Interior Advertising Provider must immediately report to the
Commission and the police any attempt to use its business premises to commit a
crime or violation.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $100 - $350 fine and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
59E-11(c)   to 30 days.
 
   (d)   An Interior Advertising Provider must not file with the Commission any
statement that it knows or reasonably should know to be false, misleading,
deceptive, or materially incomplete.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-11(d)
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-12 General Requirements – Notice to TLC.
   (a)   Material Change in Information. An Interior Advertising Provider must
notify the Commission in writing on a form approved by the Commission of any
material change in the information contained in its current Interior
Advertising Provider License application or renewal, including but not limited
to Information Security & Use of Personal Information Policies.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-12(a)   up to 30 days.
 
   (b)   Suspension or Revocation of License. An Interior Advertising Provider
must immediately notify the Commission in writing of any suspension or
revocation of any license granted to the Interior Advertising Provider by,
including but not limited to, any agency of the City or State of New York, or
the government of the United States.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-12(b)   until compliance.
 
   (c)   Security Breach. An Interior Advertising Provider must inform the
Commission in writing if it is required to make disclosures under State or
Federal law regarding security breaches, including the New York State
Information Security Breach and Notification Act (General Business Law § 899-
aa).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-12(c)
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-13 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address.
   (a)   Each Interior Advertising Provider must designate and provide to the
Commission the street address of its primary Interior Advertising Provider
location as its Mailing Address.
   (b)   An Interior Advertising Provider must have and provide to the
Commission at all times a working Email Address and telephone number.
   (c)   An Interior Advertising Provider must report any change of Mailing
Address, Email Address, and telephone number to the Commission in a form
acceptable to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $100 fine. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59E-13(a) - (c)
 
   (d)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address or email address provided by the Interior Advertising
Provider.
   (e)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided to the
Commission by the Interior Advertising Provider.
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-14 Business Requirements – Change in Business Ownership or Application
Information.
   (a)   Change to Application Information. An Interior Advertising Provider
must notify the Commission of any changes to its application information,
including the current contact information for its principal officers and
shareholders, or that of an authorized representative of the principal officers
and shareholders, as well as the location of its business premises, mailing
address, corporate name, trade name, or any other material deviation from the
description of or information regarding the Interior Advertising Provider as
stated in the original or change application.
 
            Penalty: $1,000 - $5,000 fine and suspension
35 RCNY §  until consent of Commission is obtained or    Appearance REQUIRED
59E-14(a)   change in business ownership is withdrawn, or
            revocation.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-15 Business Requirements – Gross Revenue Sharing.
   (a)   Required Information. An Interior Advertising Provider must collect
and transmit to the Commission on a monthly basis in a format, layout and
procedure prescribed by the Commission.
      (1)   With respect to the Gross Revenue generated by interior advertising
in For-Hire Vehicles:
         (A)   a list of TLC Driver license numbers for drivers who used an
Approved Tablet provided by such Interior Advertising Provider month; and
         (B)   the Gross Revenue generated by each Approved Tablet provided by
such Interior Advertising Provider and used by a driver in that month,
including component elements such as the metrics by which Gross Revenue is
calculated, measured, and recorded, and how compensation is accumulated on each
Approved Tablet through those metrics, including but not limited to:
            (i)   The amount of time an Approved Tablet was accumulating
revenue.
            (ii)   The amount of time an Approved Tablet was broadcasting
content.
         (C)   the amount paid to the driver for that month.
      (2)   Timely Submission of Gross Revenue Records. An Interior Advertising
Provider must submit Gross Revenue Records to the Commission by no later than
the 15th day of each month, covering the preceding calendar month. For example,
all September Gross Revenue records will be due on or by October 15th. The
following penalties accrue with respect to each untimely submission of Gross
Revenue Records.
 
             Penalty: $500 for each day past the date
             the records are due if plead guilty before
35 RCNY §   a hearing and suspension until compliance;
59E-15(a)(2) $550 for each day past the date the        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             records are due if found guilty following
             a hearing and suspension until compliance.
             Fine amount not to exceed $50,000.
 
      (3)   Incomplete or Inaccurate Gross Revenue Records. Each set of Gross
Revenue records submitted to TLC by an Interior Advertising Provider must be
complete and accurate and include all information listed in and required by
paragraph (1) of this subdivision. The following penalties accrue with respect
to each Approved Tablet for which all required information was not submitted.
 
             Penalty: $100 per incomplete or inaccurate
             Gross Revenue record for the first ten
35 RCNY §   incomplete or inaccurate records and
59E-15(a)(3) suspension until compliance; $500 per each Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             incomplete or inaccurate record thereafter
             and suspension until compliance. Fine
             amount not to exceed $10,000.
 
   (b)   Maintenance of Required Information. An Interior Advertising Provider
must ensure that all required information listed above is kept and made
available for inspection by Commission representatives during regular business
hours. Required operational records must be maintained by the Interior
Advertising Provider for a period of 18 months.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $100 if plead guilty before a
59E-15(b)   hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (c)   Fee payment to Drivers. An Interior Advertising Provider must pay at
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the Gross Revenue generated by the Interior
Advertising System to each Driver leasing, using, or operating an Approved
Tablet in a For-Hire Vehicle.
      (1)   An Interior Advertising Provider must not deduct any fees from
Gross Revenue when calculating Gross Revenue to determine the minimum amount to
be paid to each Driver operating an Approved Tablet, including but not limited
to: credit card processing fees or charges, installation or deinstallation
fees, operating fees, rental fees, fees paid to other licensees, damages,
repair and replacement fees, deposits, taxes, fines, tips, surcharges,
interest.
      (2)   When calculating Gross Revenue, an Interior Advertising Provider
must not deduct any time that an Interior Advertising System is muted during a
Driver's shift.
      (3)   An Interior Advertising Provider must compensate each Driver
operating an Approved Tablet in a For-Hire Vehicle on no less than a weekly
basis. Payments to a Driver and access to these funds must be provided at no
cost to the Driver, no later than two weeks after the broadcasting of the
Electronic Media. The Interior Advertising Provider must pay the Driver,
including any sublessee Drivers, and if the Interior Advertising Provider
delegates or assigns this responsibility to another party, the Interior
Advertising Provider is responsible for making full payment to the Driver if
any designee or assignee fails to pay the Driver as required, and the Driver
reports non-payment to the Interior Advertising Provider or the agent within
three years.
 
            Penalty:
35 RCNY §  First Violation: $200 fine  Appearance REQUIRED
59E-15(c)   Second Violation: $300 fine
            Third Violation: $500 fine.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-16 Business Requirements – Sale, Lease or Use of Interior Advertising
System.
All of the following conditions apply with regard to an Interior Advertising
Provider's sale, lease, making available for use, and installation of an
Interior Advertising System for use in a For Hire Vehicle:
   (a)   The Interior Advertising Provider must not sell, lease, make available
for use, or install an Interior Advertising System for use in a For Hire
Vehicle unless the Interior Advertising System has been approved by the
Commission pursuant to this sub-chapter and the Interior Advertising System
installed in the For Hire Vehicle is materially identical to the Interior
Advertising System that was approved pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59E-05;
   (b)   Prior to the sale, lease, making available for use, or installation of
an Interior Advertising System, an Interior Advertising Provider must present
to the Driver a contract, or terms and conditions, meeting the requirements set
forth in 35 RCNY §
59E-17. Such contract terms and conditions must be agreed to and signed or
accepted by the Driver;
   (c)   Prior to installation of an Interior Advertising System, or prior to
making an Interior Advertising System operational, the Interior Advertising
Provider must offer to the Driver, at no additional charge, at least one
training session on the proper use and operation of the Interior Advertising
System. The content of the training must be sufficient to enable the Driver to
properly operate the Interior Advertising System.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or
59E-16(a) - (c) suspension up to 60 days or revocation for Appearance REQUIRED
                each subdivision violated.
 
   (d)   The Interior Advertising Provider must reimburse the Driver for any
and all Fines caused by a failure of the Interior Advertising or any of its
Components, including the Approved Tablet and Approved Software to perform in
accordance with the Interior Advertising requirements as required by 35 RCNY §
59E-22 where such failure is not attributable to the acts or omissions of the
Driver, the abuse or misuse of the Interior Advertising System or other
circumstances beyond the control of the Interior Advertising Provider. For
purposes of this provision, the term "Fine" means any and all fees, fines, or
financial penalties imposed on a Driver by the Commission or other any City
agency, relating to interior advertising in For-Hire Vehicles.
   (e)   In the case of a Fine covered by subdivision (d) of this section, the
Driver must make reasonable efforts to mitigate the amount of the Fine,
including not operating the Interior Advertising System if the Driver knows or
has reason to know the Approved Tablet or Approved Software is malfunctioning.
   (f)   If the Interior Advertising Provider subcontracts any services related
to the Interior Advertising System, the Interior Advertising Provider will be
fully responsible to the Driver for the acts and omissions of its
subcontractors and of persons either directly or indirectly employed by such
subcontractors.
   (g)   Receipts to Drivers for all Payments. 
      (1)   An Interior Advertising Provider must give a Driver a written or
electronic receipt for every payment made under the contract and these Rules.
      (2)   The receipt must include:
         (A)   the name of the Driver.
         (B)   the TLC Driver license number.
         (C)   the date.
         (D)   the payment amount.
         (E)   the payment purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $200 fine. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59E-16(g)
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-17 Business Requirements – Contract with Driver.
The contract or agreement between the Interior Advertising Provider and the
Licensed Driver for the lease, or use of an Approved Electronic Tablet,
required by 35 RCNY §
59E-16, must contain provisions specifying that:
   (a)   The Interior Advertising Provider agrees to compensate the Driver on
no less than a weekly basis.
   (b)   Each party agrees that any limitation of liability in the contract or
agreement shall not apply to any and all damages, fines, penalties,
deficiencies, losses, liabilities, and expenses (including reasonable
attorneys' fees) arising from direct claims between the parties based on damage
to real or tangible personal property, death or bodily injury caused by the
negligent or willful conduct of a party.
   (c)   Termination of the relationship is permitted as follows:
      (1)   The Interior Advertising Provider must provide to the Driver de-
installation, return, or removal of the Approved Tablet at no charge.
      (2)   The Interior Advertising Provider or the Driver may terminate the
relationship upon ten (10) days written notice to the other party.
   (d)   The Interior Advertising Provider and the Driver will agree that the
contract is deemed to be executed in the City and State of New York, regardless
of the domicile of the parties, and is governed by and construed in accordance
with the laws of the State of New York (notwithstanding New York choice of law
or conflict of law principles) and the laws of the United States, where
applicable.
   (e)   The Interior Advertising Provider and the Driver agree that any and
all claims asserted by or against either party arising under or related to the
contract will be heard and determined either in the courts of the United States
located in the City of New York or in the courts of New York State located in
the City of New York.
   (g)   Availability. The contract, or terms and conditions, must be made
available to the Driver at all times. Electronic signatures are permissible for
electronic contracts or terms and conditions and all signed electronic
contracts or terms and conditions must be transmitted electronically to the
Driver by the Interior Advertising Provider.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59E-17(g)
 
   (h)   Retaliation. An Interior Advertising Provider must not retaliate
against any Driver for making a good faith complaint against any Interior
Advertising Provider for violation of the contract provisions or terms and
conditions in 35 RCNY §
59E-17. "Retaliation" will be broadly construed and will include imposing any
adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or withdrawing
any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Penalty: $1,000 fine, plus restitution to
35 RCNY §  the driver for losses for the first offense
59E-17(h)   and a $10,000 fine plus restitution to the  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second offense within five
            years.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-18 Business Requirements – Maintenance of Interior Advertising System.
   (a)   Maintenance Service. The Interior Advertising Provider must provide to
a Driver such maintenance services as are necessary to maintain the Interior
Advertising System in good working order and in accordance with the
requirements in 35 RCNY §
59E-22. Such maintenance services must include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Providing and installing replacement parts, and Hardware and
Software Updates; and
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension
59E-18(a)(1) up to 60 days or revocation for each paragraph Appearance REQUIRED
             violated.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-19 Business Requirements – Record-Keeping and Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Gross Revenue data and its component elements relating to any Approved
Tablet must be stored, maintained, available, and accessible to the Commission
and any designee at all times.
   (b)   Except in accordance with law, no third party other than the
Commission or its designee may access data for transactions in which such third
party was not involved and for which it had no responsibility.
   (c)   In the event of a failure or interruption in transmission of Gross
Revenue data to the Commission or its designee, the Interior Advertising System
must be capable of saving and restoring transmission of the data without any
degradation of data integrity or loss of data.
   (d)   All data required to be collected and transmitted pursuant to this
section must be transmitted according to a schedule prescribed by the
Commission.
   (e)   Maintain Driver Information. An Interior Advertising Provider must
maintain information of all Drivers with whom the Interior Advertising Provider
has contracts or agreements.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or      Appearance REQUIRED
59E-19(a) - (e) suspension up to 60 days or revocation.
 
   (f)   Record Retention Period. An Interior Advertising Provider must
maintain the records required by this section for three (3) years.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-19(f)   up to 60 days or revocation.
 
   (g)   Examination of Records. An Interior Advertising Provider must allow
any agent of the Commission or any law enforcement officer to examine at any
time all of the records the Interior Advertising Provider is required to
maintain under this subchapter.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59E-19(g)   compliance.
 
   (h)   Inspection of Premises. An Interior Advertising Provider must allow
any agent of the Commission or any law enforcement officer to inspect any
portion of its business premises at any time, as permitted by law.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-19(h)
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-20 Business Requirements – Use of Personal Information and Certain
Location-Based Data.
The Interior Advertising Provider must only collect, use, and process
Identifying Information in accordance with the information security and use of
identifying information policy it has on file with the Commission pursuant to
subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
59E-05.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-20
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-21 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules.
   (a)   Acceptance of Gift or Gratuity. An Interior Advertising Provider, any
person acting on the Interior Advertising Provider's behalf and the Interior
Advertising Provider's employees must not accept any gift, gratuity, or thing
of value from an owner or driver of any vehicle licensed by the Commission or
from anyone acting on behalf of an owner or driver for the purpose of violating
any of these rules through acts of commission or omission.
   (b)   Reporting Requests for Gift or Gratuity. An Interior Advertising
Provider, any person acting on the Interior Advertising Provider's behalf and
the Interior Advertising Provider's employees must immediately report to the
Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation any request or demand for a
gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any employee, representative, or member of
the Commission or by any public servant.
   (c)   Offer of Gifts and Gratuities. An Interior Advertising Provider or any
person acting on the Interior Advertising Provider's behalf and the Interior
Advertising Provider's employees must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or
thing of value to any employee, representative, or member of the Commission or
to any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(a-c)
 
   (d)   Reporting Offers of Gift or Gratuity. An Interior Advertising Provider
must notify the Commission immediately by telephone and in writing or email
within 24 hours after receiving any offer of a gift or gratuity prohibited by
subdivision (a) of this section.
   (e)   Fraud, Misrepresentation & Larceny. An Interior Advertising Provider,
while performing its duties and responsibilities as an Interior Advertising
Provider, must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert with
another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation, or larceny. Examples of fraud,
misrepresentation or larceny include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   falsification of Gross Revenue data;
      (2)   adjustment or manipulation of the Interior Advertising System;
      (3)   falsification of Trip Data.
 
35 RCNY §    Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation, Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(d)-(e)
 
   (f)   Willful Acts of Omission and Commission. 
      (1)   Omission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of an
Interior Advertising Provider, an Interior Advertising Provider must not
deliberately fail to perform, alone or with another, any act whose failure to
perform is against the best interests of the public, although not specifically
mentioned in these Rules.
      (2)   Commission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of an
Interior Advertising Provider, an Interior Advertising Provider must not
deliberately perform, alone or with another, any act that is dishonest,
fraudulent or against the best interests of the public, although not
specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $150 - $350 fine and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(f)   to 30 days or revocation,
 
   (g)   Notice of Criminal Conviction. 
      (1)   An Interior Advertising Provider must notify the Commission in
writing within two (2) days after any criminal conviction of the Interior
Advertising Provider or any of the Interior Advertising Provider's Business
Entity Persons.
      (2)   Such notification must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition of the conviction issued by
the clerk of the court.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(g)   up to 30 days,
 
   (h)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. An Interior Advertising Provider must not
threaten, harass, or abuse any governmental or Commission representative,
public servant, or other person while performing their duties and
responsibilities as a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(h)   up to 30 days or revocation,
 
   (i)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. An Interior Advertising Provider must
not use or attempt to use any physical force against a Commission
representative, public servant, or other person while performing their duties
and responsibilities as a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(i)   up to 60 days or revocation,
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. An Interior Advertising
Provider must cooperate with all law enforcement officers and representatives
of the Commission at all times.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine, Appearance NOT REQUIRED
59E-21(j)
 
   (k)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission. An Interior Advertising
Provider must answer and comply as directed with all questions, communications,
notices, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its representatives.
An Interior Advertising Provider must produce their Commission License and
other documents whenever the Commission requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
59E-21(k)   compliance.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 59E-22 Technical Requirements – Approved Electronic Tablet.
No Electronic Tablet or Interior Advertising Software will be approved by the
Commission pursuant to this subchapter unless it complies with the all the
requirements set forth in this section.
   (a)   Driver, Vehicle, and Software Authentication. 
      (1)   Upon boot-up, the Electronic Tablet must automatically check for
and install any Software Updates prior to allowing the Driver to engage the
Electronic Tablet.
      (2)   Unless assigned to a specific Driver, the Electronic Tablet must
only allow the Driver to engage the Electronic Tablet and Approved Software
upon log-in using either biometrics or username and password, validated against
a system-initiated search of Valid TLC Licenses.
      (3)   If any required functionality or hardware is disconnected or
inoperable, the Interior Advertising Provider must notify the Driver that the
Electronic Tablet needs to be serviced and must not allow any Driver to engage
the Electronic Tablet until the Electronic Tablet is repaired to full
functionality or replaced.
      (4)   The Electronic Tablet must automatically log a Driver out of the
Electronic Tablet if another Driver logs into the Electronic Tablet.
      (5)   The Electronic Tablet must prevent a Driver from logging into more
than one Electronic Tablet at the same time.
   (b)   Driver Functionality and Interaction. 
      (1)   Unless the Electronic Tablet is assigned to a specific Driver, the
Interior Advertising System must enable the Driver to log off and log on.
      (2)   The Interior Advertising System must allow a Driver to interact
with the Electronic Tablet and/or Approved Software ONLY when the Vehicle is
standing or stopped, except that the Electronic Tablet may permit a Driver to
engage or disengage the Electronic Tablet with a single touch using pre-
programmed buttons or using voice activation while the vehicle is in motion.
   (c)   Passenger Functionality and Interaction. 
      (1)   Any Passenger-facing screen displaying third-party content must be
authorized by the TLC and adhere to the following specifications:
         (A)   the Passenger must be able to turn off any Passenger-facing
screen (i.e. render the screen blank and muted) at any time, without
obstruction;
         (B)   the volume of any Passenger-facing device must be mutable and
must be controlled by the Passenger, without obstruction; and
         (C)   a Passenger-facing screen must display content that includes a
reminder about the payment of a gratuity from a passenger to a driver.
      (2)   Any Passenger-facing device that displays third-party content must
display content provided by the TLC, subject to the following limitations:
         (A)   The content provided by the TLC will be in the same format as
the third-party content displayed by the Passenger-facing device; and
         (B)   At least fifteen percent (15%) of the Passenger-facing device's
advertising airtime will be comprised of TLC-provided content.
            (i)   If an Interior Advertising System is integrated with a High
Volume For-Hire Service (i.e. Passenger information is shared), the 15%
advertising airtime must be calculated and played/broadcasted based upon each
new dispatched trip.
            (ii)   If an Interior Advertising System is not integrated with a
High Volume For-Hire Service (i.e. Passenger information is not shared), the
15% advertising airtime must be calculated and played/broadcasted on an hourly
basis.
      (3)   Specific Passenger-Facing Functions. 
         (A)   No internet browser capability.
         (B)   Only advertisements, personalized content, and games, that
adhere to the content requirements in this chapter, through a software
application.
         (C)   No payment transaction capability.
         (D)   No capturing of identifying information, as defined by § 12-
2301* of the Administrative Code and the Office of Technology and Innovation
Privacy Protection Protocols.
* Editor's note: As set forth in City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025; § 12-2301
of the Administrative Code does not currenty exist.
         (E)   An Approved Tablet may facilitate gratuities to the Driver
through the means provided in 35 RCNY
Chapter 59B.
      (4)   Accessibility. Interior Advertising Providers must provide the
following accommodations for Passengers with vision disabilities:
         (A)   the ability for a Passenger with a vision disability to engage
Approved Tablet features without requiring the assistance of a Driver;
         (B)   audio instructions that include a reminder about the payment of
a gratuity from a passenger to a driver.
      (5)   Approved Tablets must not contain sharp features, such as corners,
and must remain securely mounted or attached to a stationary component of a
For-Hire Vehicle.
   (d)   Interior Advertising System interoperability. The Interior Advertising
System must be able to receive any Commission mandated change to the Approved
Tablet and/or Approved Software via wireless communication initiated by the
Interior Advertising Provider.
   (e)   Advertisements and other passenger-facing content other than TLC-
provided content. All Approved Tablets must conform to the following
specifications:
      (1)   All Passenger-facing content must comply with TV-Y through TV-
G ratings in accordance with the standards established by the TV Parental
Guidelines rating system from 8 a.m. - 8 p.m. daily or a similar rating in
industries where such rating exist, e.g. the Entertainment Software Rating
Board's rating system for video games.
      (2)   No Passenger-facing content may contain, imply, or declare
endorsement by the City, the Commission, or any other agency of the City
without the prior written consent of the Commission.
      (3)   No Passenger-facing content may contain any content that falls
within the following categories:
         (A)   Advertisements or any other material or information promoting
unlawful or illegal goods, services, or activities;
         (B)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information
containing obscene images or material (see New York Penal Law § 235.00, as such
provision may be amended from time to time);
         (C)   Advertisements or any other material, images, or description,
which, if sold or loaned to a minor for monetary consideration with knowledge
of its character or content, would give rise to a violation of New York Penal
Law § 235.21 (see also New York Penal Law § 235.20) as such provisions may be
amended from time to time;
         (D)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information that
are libelous, defamatory, infringe intellectual property rights, including but
not limited to trademark, copyright or patent rights, of a third party, or
violate New York Civil Rights Law § 50, as such provisions may be amended from
time to time;
         (E)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information that
demean or disparage an individual or group of individuals. For purposes of
determining whether any such advertisements or other images, material or
information demean or disparage an individual or group of individuals, the
Interior Advertising Provider will determine whether a reasonably prudent
person of the For-Hire Vehicle ridership using prevailing community standards,
would believe that such advertisements or other images, material or information
ridicule or mock, are abusive or hostile to, or debase the dignity or stature
of, an individual or group of individuals;
         (F)   Advertisements or any other material or information that propose
a commercial transaction where the material or information contained in it is
false, misleading, or deceptive; and
         (G)   Advertisements or any other material or information that propose
a commercial transaction pertaining to or promote tobacco or tobacco-related
products.
   (f)   Security. All features of the Interior Advertising System required by
this section, including the collection, transmission and maintenance of data by
the Interior Advertising Provider, must comply and remain in compliance with
the latest version of National Institute of Standards and Technology Special
Publication 800-53 and the information security and use of identifying
information policy the Interior Advertising Provider has on file with the TLC
pursuant to subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
59E-05.
   (g)   Data Retention. All data required to be collected, transmitted and
maintained pursuant to this section must be maintained for at least three (3)
years.
   (h)   Inspection by TLC. The Interior Advertising Provider must enable the
Commission to inspect all components, including Hardware and mounting of the
Interior Advertising System.
   (i)   Only one Approved Tablet may be operated in a For-Hire Vehicle at any
one time, pursuant to subdivision (i) of 35 RCNY §
59E-22.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
59E-22(i)   hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
Chapter 60: Paratransit Vehicles and Bases
**** Subchapter 60A: Paratransit Vehicle Owners ****
§ 60A-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining and
maintaining a Paratransit Vehicle Owner's License.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violation of the requirements of maintaining
a Paratransit Vehicle Owner's License.
§ 60A-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 of the Rules of the City of New York, in which case the payment of
the fines will be deferred until 30 days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Mandatory Penalties.
      (1)   The following violations incur mandatory penalties:
Description
of          Rule        Mandatory Penalty for All Violations 
Violation
1.
Operation   35 RCNY §
of          60A-10(a)
unlicensed
vehicle
2. driver   35 RCNY §
unlicensed  60A-10(b)
by TLC
3. Driver
unlicensed
by State
and/or has  35 RCNY §
not         60A-10(c),
qualified   (d)
as Article
19-A "bus               • First violation: $100 - $350
driver"
4.                      • Second violation (any combination of provisions) within 24 months: $350 –
Unlicensed              $500
advertising 35 RCNY §
"having     60A-10(f)   • Third violation (any combination of provisions) within 24 months: Mandatory
Paratransit             Revocation of License
Service"
5. Marking
or defacing 35 RCNY §
Paratransit 60A-09(a)
Vehicle
License
6. No
overcharges 35 RCNY §
or          60A-22(a)
disability
surcharges
7. No
refusing    35 RCNY §
orderly     60A-16(d)
passenger
 
      (2)   The 24-month period will be counted backward from the date of the
most recent conviction.
      (3)   The License of any Licensee who has five (or more) open and
outstanding summonses for a 12-month period, will be revoked. The 12-month
period will be counted from the date the earliest summons was issued.
§ 60A-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Paratransit Vehicle License.
   (b)   Base Affiliation. Each Paratransit Vehicle must be associated with a
specific Paratransit Base and work only with the Base with which it is
affiliated.
   (c)   Business Entity. A Paratransit Business Entity can be a corporation, a
partnership or a limited liability company.
   (d)   Driver in this Subchapter means the Driver of a Paratransit Vehicle.
   (e)   Electronic Trip Record System is the hardware and software that
collects and stores the data that must be recorded for each passenger trip.
   (f)   License in this Subchapter means a License for a Paratransit Vehicle.
   (g)   Licensee refers to a Paratransit Vehicle Owner.
   (h)   Rate Schedule is the Commission-approved listing of the manner in
which and amount of fare that a Paratransit Vehicle Owner is permitted to
charge a passenger.
   (i)   Vehicle refers to a Paratransit Vehicle.
   (j)   Vehicle Owner (or Owner) refers to a Paratransit Vehicle Owner, and
can be an individual or Business Entity who:
      (1)   Owns the Vehicle outright;
      (2)   Is purchasing the Vehicle from a conditional vendor;
      (3)   Is leasing the Vehicle; or
      (4)   Is an agent or employee of any of the above and has authority to
act on their behalf.
§ 60A-04 Licensing – Requirements.
Requirements (a) through (e) apply to an individual Applicant and to all of a
Business Entity Applicant's Business Entity Persons.
   (a)   Age. Applicants must be at least 18 years of age.
   (b)   Identification. Applicants for a new (original) Paratransit Vehicle
License must provide both of the following:
      (1)   A Valid Government photo ID.
      (2)   A Valid social security number.
   (c)   Fingerprinting to Verify Good Moral Character.
      (1)   Applicants must be of good moral character.
      (2)   Applicants must be fingerprinted.
      (3)   In addition, any individual and all Business Entity Persons of a
Business Entity that provides funds to an Applicant must be fingerprinted,
unless the provider is a licensed bank or loan company.
      (4)   The Commission may waive any of this subdivision's fingerprinting
requirements.
   (d)   Valid Certificate of Operating Authority. Applicants must have a valid
certificate of Operating Authority for the City of New York issued by the New
York State Department of Transportation.
   (e)   Operate from Licensed Base. Applicants must demonstrate that the
Vehicle will operate from a base that is Licensed unless exempted from this
requirement by the Commission.
   (f)   Complete Application Forms. The Applicant must complete and file the
required Commission application forms.
   (g)   Fitness to Hold License. An Applicant must demonstrate that they are
Fit to Hold a License. In making this determination, the Commission will review
the Applicant's (or Licensee's) criminal and driving records, medical and
mental health records, and any history of drug or alcohol use.
   (h)   Own a Paratransit Vehicle. Applicants must have ownership in a
Paratransit Vehicle.
   (i)   Vehicle Mileage Requirements. The Applicant for an original (new)
License must submit a New York State Department of Transportation Form MC300,
dated not more than one month from the application date, proving that the
Vehicle meets the relevant mileage requirement:
      (1)   On and after January 1, 2009, a vehicle must have fewer than 50,000
miles.
      (2)   On and after January 1, 2010, a vehicle must have fewer than 25,000
miles.
      (3)   On and after January 1, 2011, a vehicle must be of the most recent
model year or the immediately preceding model year and must have fewer than 500
miles.
   (j)   Other Requirements Relating to the Vehicle. The Applicant must
demonstrate that:
      (1)   The vehicle is in safe operating condition and meets all the
requirements of the Commission and all other Government agencies that have
concurrent jurisdiction.
      (2)   Applicant has the required vehicle liability insurance coverage by
bond or policy as determined by the State of New York.
      (3)   The certificate of title and the certificate of registration are in
the Applicant's name (unless title is retained by a lessor or conditional
vendor).
      (4)   The vehicle will not have to be retired before the end of the two-
year term of the License under the terms of Vehicle Retirement established in
35 RCNY §
60A-34.
   (k)   Other Required Documents. In addition to copies of the certificate of
title and the certificate of registration, the following documents must be
filed with the application:
      (1)   A copy of the motor vehicle tax stamp receipt for the Paratransit
Vehicle.
      (2)   A current Rate Schedule.
      (3)   A New York State Department of Transportation inspection checklist.
      (4)   A copy of the leasing agreement, if Applicant is leasing the
vehicle.
      (5)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
         (i)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the
clerk of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is
located.
         (ii)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file
with its application:
            A.   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
            B.   A list of officers and shareholders
            C.   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
         (iii)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a
limited liability company, it must file with its application:
            A.   A copy of its articles of organization
            B.   A copy of its operating agreement
            C.   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (l)   Designate Drivers as Agents to Accept Service. The Applicant must
agree that any Driver who operates one of the Owner's Paratransit Vehicles will
be considered as an agent of the Owner for purposes of accepting service of
Commission notices to correct Vehicle defects.
   (m)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address.
   (n)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (o)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax applicable to the Applicant's Vehicle. If
the Applicant has not made payment to the NYS DMV, the Applicant must pay the
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the Commission.
      (2)   An Applicant who has already paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
must provide proof of payment in the form of a copy of the New York State
issued registration receipt.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 60A-05 Licensing – Terms of License.
   (a)   New Licenses. The term of a new Vehicle License is two years from the
date it is issued.
   (b)   Renewals. The renewal term of a Vehicle License is two years from the
date on which the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File Application for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date will not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid after
the License expiration date until the application for renewal is approved by
the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 60 days
after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a late
fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid until the application for renewal is approved by the
Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 60 days after the expiration
date.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (c) of this section to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 60A-06 Licensing – License and Administrative Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a Vehicle License will be $275 annually.
   (b)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee
of $25 for a each License it issues to replace a lost or mutilated License.
   (c)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application, if it allows the filing at all.
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves an application.
   (e)   Vehicle Transfer Fees.
      (1)   A Vehicle Licensee can change the Vehicle's affiliation from one
Paratransit Base to a different Paratransit Base after approval by the
Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (2)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the License from one vehicle to
another after approval by the by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (3)   A Vehicle Licensee can replace the license plates on the Vehicle
after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (4)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the license plates from one vehicle
to another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (5)   A Vehicle Licensee must pay a separate fee for each type of vehicle
transfer. This is true even if the Vehicle Licensee wants to do several types
of vehicle transfer all at one time.
   (f)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   For Licenses Issued on or after June 1, 2012 if Tax NOT paid to NYS
DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800,
to be paid with the application for the license.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (2)   At License Renewal for Licenses Expiring on or after June 1, 2012,
if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800
for each renewal License period. The tax must be paid with the renewal
application.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (3)   Interim Payments for licenses expiring on or after June 1, 2012 and
before June 1, 2014 if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV. An interim payment of
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax is due on June 1, 2012 for licenses expiring on or
after June 1, 2012 and before June 1, 2014, provided that the Vehicle Licensee
has not paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the NYS DMV.
         (i)   The amount of the interim payment is:
If a license expires during:            The licensee must make an interim
                                        payment of:
June, July or August 2012               $100
September, October or November 2012     $200
December 2012, January 2013 or February $300
2013
March, April or May 2013                $400
June, July or August 2013               $500
September, October or November 2013     $600
December 2013, January 2014 or February $700
2014
March, April or May 2014                $800
 
      (4)   Refunds.
         (i)   The Commission will not refund any payment of the Commercial
Motor Vehicle Tax.
         (ii)   Applications for refunds, including but not limited to refunds
upon transfer, surrender or termination, must be made to the NYC Department of
Finance. The application will be reviewed in accordance with the Administrative
Code and the Rules of the NYC Department of Finance.
§ 60A-07 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Meet the Requirements. The Commission will deny an
application for a new or renewed License if the Applicant fails to meet the
requirements.
   (b)   No Longer Meets Requirements. The Commission will deny a Licensee's
renewal application or suspend or revoke a License if the Commission learns
that the Vehicle Owner no longer meets the licensing requirements.
   (c)   Material Misrepresentation or Falsification. The Commission will deny
a Paratransit License application and may suspend or revoke a renewal
application, and can impose other sanctions if the Applicant:
      (1)   Fails to notify the Commission of any material change in the
information contained in the application;
      (2)   Attempts to conceal the identity of a party who has an interest in
the ownership of a Paratransit Vehicle; or
      (3)   Lies or misrepresents any information in the application.
   (d)   Prior License Revocation. The Commission will not issue any License to
any individual or Business Entity that has had its license revoked until at
least one year following the date of the revocation.
   (e)   Misleading Trade Name. The Commission will not issue a License to a
Business Entity with a corporate or trade name similar to a name already in use
by another Paratransit Vehicle Owner.
   (f)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 45
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
60 days of the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (g)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
   (h)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   The Commission will deny an application, including a renewal
application, if the Applicant owes the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax required
under subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
60A-13 on any Vehicle subject to the application.
      (2)   Payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision is a condition to issuance of a License,
including a renewal License, and the maintaining of such License.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 60A-08 Licensing – Process upon Denial.
   (a)   Denial of Application. If the Commission denies the application for a
Paratransit Vehicle License or its renewal, the Applicant will be notified, in
writing, of the reason(s) for the denial.
   (b)   [Repealed.]
§ 60A-09 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
   (a)   Unauthorized Changes to License. A Vehicle Owner must not make any
unauthorized entry on a Paratransit Vehicle License or change, deface, conceal,
obliterate or render any entry on that License unreadable.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60A-09(a)   60A-02(d)
 
   (b)   Surrender of Unreadable License. A Vehicle Owner must immediately
surrender an unreadable Paratransit Vehicle License to the Commission to obtain
a legible replacement.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-09(b)
 
   (c)   Surrender Upon Suspension or Revocation. A Vehicle Owner must
surrender a suspended or revoked License it to the Commission within 48 hours
of the suspension or revocation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-09(c)
 
   (d)   Report of Lost, Stolen, or Destroyed License.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must notify the Commission and the Police
Department within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) of the theft,
loss or destruction of a Paratransit Vehicle License.
      (2)   The Vehicle Owner must also furnish the Commission with an
affidavit or other information as may be required, including the police receipt
number.
      (3)   A substitute Paratransit Vehicle License will be issued by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-09(d)
 
   (e)   Report of Plate Replacement. A Vehicle Owner must notify the
Commission within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) after
replacing the Vehicle's New York State license plates.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-09(e)
 
§ 60A-10 Compliance with Laws – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Vehicle Must Be Licensed. A Vehicle Owner must not allow a vehicle to
be dispatched or operated if the vehicle does not have a Valid Paratransit
Vehicle License from the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties. See 35 RCNY §   
60A-10(a)   60A-02(d)
 
   (b)   Driver Must Have a Paratransit License. A Vehicle Owner must not allow
a Vehicle to be dispatched or operated by a driver who does not have a Valid
Paratransit Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60A-10(b)   60A-02(d)
 
   (c)   Drivers Must Have State Driver's License. A Vehicle Owner must not
allow a Vehicle to be dispatched or operated by a driver who does not have a
Valid state driver's license.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60A-10(c)   60A-02(d)
 
   (d)   Compliance with § 5-09(d). A Vehicle Owner must not allow a Vehicle to
be dispatched or operated by a driver who has not complied with § 5-09(d) of
Article 19-A of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law (setting forth
certain requirements for bus drivers).
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60A-10(d)   60A-02(d)
 
   (e)   Base Must be Licensed. A Vehicle Owner must not dispatch or allow to
be dispatched any Paratransit Vehicle from a base that does not have a Valid
License, unless it has been exempted by the New York State Department of
Transportation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT required
60A-10(e)
 
   (f)   Advertising of Unlicensed Paratransit Service. A Vehicle Owner whose
License is not Valid may not advertise or claim to offer "Paratransit Service"
or any comparable service.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60A-10(f)   60A-02(d)
 
   (g)   Activity After License Expiration. Any activity to provide paratransit
service after the Vehicle License has expired and before a renewal License has
been issued is considered "unlicensed activity" and is subject to the penalties
in these Rules and in the Administrative Code.
§ 60A-11 Compliance with Law – Vehicle Insurance.
   (a)   Maintain Liability Insurance.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must maintain at least the minimum amount of
liability insurance required by the NYS Department of Transportation for each
Vehicle owned by Owner.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner must comply with all New York State Laws regarding
this coverage.
 
35 RCNY §            Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-11(a) (1) and (2)
 
   (b)   Submit Proof of Insurance.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must submit annual proof of liability insurance
coverage to the Commission on or before the 15th day of January of each year.
      (2)   Proof must include the name and address of the carrier and the
insurance policy number for each Paratransit Vehicle owned.
 
35 RCNY §            Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-11(b) (1) and (2)
 
   (c)   Notify Commission of Cancellation or Change of Carrier. A Vehicle
Owner must notify the Commission, in writing, within 72 hours after receiving
notice of:
      (1)   Cancellation of the required liability insurance;
      (2)   Change of insurance carrier; or
      (3)   Change in the policy number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-11(c)
 
   (d)   Surrender License on Loss or Termination of Insurance. A Vehicle Owner
must surrender the Paratransit Vehicle License to the Commission prior to or on
the termination date of the liability insurance unless:
      (1)   The Owner is not notified, or
      (2)   The Owner obtains new insurance effective on the termination date
of the old policy.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-11(d)
 
§ 60A-12 Compliance with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery. A Vehicle Applicant or Licensee must not offer or give any
gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or member of
the Commission or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(a)
 
   (b)   Failure to Report Bribery. A Vehicle Owner must immediately report to
the Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by
any employee, representative or member of the Commission or any other public
servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(b)   revocation
 
   (c)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, any act of
fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(c)   days or revocation.
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(d)   days or revocation
 
   (e)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not deliberately perform
or attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(e)   days or revocation
 
   (f)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or
abuse any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(f)   days
 
   (g)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Vehicle Owner or any act in connection with those duties,
a Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person
or Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $20 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(g)   days; possible revocation (OATH)
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must notify the Commission within 15 calendar days
after any criminal conviction of the Licensee, individually or, if the Licensee
is a Business Entity, of any Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate issued by the clerk of the court explaining
what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(h)
 
   (i)   Failure to Cooperate with Commission Enforcement.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must cooperate with all Commission enforcement
officers and all authorized representatives of the Commission.
      (2)   Cooperation includes, but is not limited to, responding to a
request for the Licensee's name, License number, and any documents Licensee is
required to have in his or her possession.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 to 150 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(i)
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must promptly and truthfully answer all questions
and comply with all communications, directives, and summonses issued by the
Commission or its representatives.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(j)(1)
 
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner must respond to any contact from the Commission
within forty-eight hours, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT required
60A-12(j)(2)
 
   (k)   Courtesy. Vehicle Owners must be courteous toward passengers and the
general public, including Commission personnel, while performing their duties
and responsibilities as Licensees.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-12(k)
 
   (l)   Unlawful Uses of Vehicle or Garage. A Vehicle Owner must not use or
permit another person to use his or her Paratransit Vehicle or garage for any
unlawful purpose and must immediately report to the police any criminal use or
attempt thereof involving the Vehicle or Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-12(l)   days
 
   (m)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60A-12(m)
 
   (n)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A Paratransit Vehicle Owner must not retaliate against any Driver
for making a good faith complaint against any Owner.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first violation and a
60A-12(n)   fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second violation within five
            years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015)
§ 60A-13 Compliance with Laws – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Compliance with Laws, Rules and Regulations. A Vehicle Owner must
comply with the Commission's Paratransit Vehicle Specifications and all other
pertinent laws, rules or regulations governing Vehicle Owners.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60A-13(a)
 
   (b)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Owner must pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax due as described
in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision on an Owner's Vehicle as and when
required by the Commission in these Rules.
      (2)   An Owner must pay the amounts required in subdivision (f) of 35
RCNY §
60A-06, including interim payments, if any.
      (3)   An Owner must also pay any additional Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
amount for any tax year or period which the New York City Department of Finance
has notified the Commission is due and unpaid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and suspension Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60A-13(b)   until compliance
 
§ 60A-14 Operations – Business Premises.
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-15 Operations – Management Oversight (Use of Agents).
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-16 Operations – Service Requirements (Passengers).
   (a)   Timely Pickups. Vehicle Owners must schedule the daily trips as
efficiently as possible, to avoid unreasonably late pickups and missed trips.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-16(a)
 
   (b)   Notify Passenger of Delay. If a pickup is unreasonably delayed or
cancelled, the Vehicle Owner (or Base Owner) must promptly notify the waiting
passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-16(b)
 
   (c)   Monitor Drivers' Behavior. Vehicle Owners must monitor the behavior
and conduct of the Drivers toward the passengers, investigate complaints, and
take appropriate action to resolve the complaints.
 
            Fine: $50 - $250 and/or suspension until a
35 RCNY §  monitoring procedure is devised and/or other    Appearance REQUIRED
60A-16(c)   appropriate action is taken to the satisfaction
            of the Commission
 
   (d)   Unauthorized Refusal to Provide Transportation. A Vehicle Owner must
not refuse by words, gestures or any other means, to provide transportation to
any orderly person who has prearranged the trip and the destination is within
New York City, unless:
      (1)   There is no Vehicle then available for the requested
transportation; or
      (2)   There is a justification for refusing that is listed in 35 RCNY §
56-20(b) of the Paratransit Driver's chapter.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties. See 35 RCNY §   
60A-16(d)   60A-02(d)
 
§ 60A-17 Operations – Owners' Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Training for Paratransit Drivers. A Vehicle Owner must ensure that
every Driver is trained how to properly and safely:
      (1)   Assist any Person with a Disability or other passenger in and out
of a Paratransit Vehicle
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-17(a)(1)
 
      (2)   Utilize the wheelchair ramp, the fastening devices, and any other
safety precautions or devices contained in the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-17(a)(2)
 
§ 60A-18 Records – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Trip Sheet. All Paratransit Vehicles must be equipped with an
Electronic Trip Sheet that shows the following information:
      (1)   The Paratransit Driver's License number.
      (2)   The Paratransit Vehicle's state license plate number.
      (3)   The date and time of pick-up of each passenger.
      (4)   The date and time of drop-off of each passenger.
      (5)   The locations of pick-ups and drop-offs.
      (6)   Any other entries required by the Commission and local, state or
federal law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 for each violation of this rule;
60A-18(a)   however, no violation of this rule may     Appearance NOT required
            exceed $100 for each vehicle stop
 
   (b)   Contemporaneous Recording. The specific information about each trip
must be collected and recorded when it occurs.
   (c)   Transmit Monthly. All data required under subdivision (a) above must
be electronically transmitted to the Commission on a monthly basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 if plead guilty before a
60A-18(c)   hearing; $1,000 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT required
            hearing. Suspension until compliance.
 
   (d)   Re-Write of Trip Record Prohibited. A Vehicle Owner must not rewrite a
Trip Record in whole or in part, without prior Commission approval.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-18(d)   days
 
   (e)   Correcting Electronic Trip Sheets.
      (1)   The Vehicle Owner must ensure that all necessary corrections and
additions are made to the Trip Sheet.
      (2)   The electronic Trip Record data collected in the Paratransit
Vehicle must not be erased, deleted, altered, changed or obliterated.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30 Appearance NOT required
60A-18(e)
 
   (f)   Hand-written Trip Sheets.
      (1)   In the event that the electronic Trip Record equipment
malfunctions, hand-written Trip Sheets showing the same information required in
subdivision (a) above, must be used during the period the Vehicle is permitted
to operate (see 35 RCNY §
60A-33(c)).
      (2)   The Vehicle Owner must not allow a Vehicle to be dispatched until
the Owner has signed his or her name to the hand-written Trip Sheet.
 
                           Fine: $50 for each violation
                           of this rule; however, no
35 RCNY § 60A-18(f)(1)-(2)violation of this rule may   Appearance NOT required
                           exceed $100 for each vehicle
                           stop
 
      (3)   At the end of a Driver's shift, the Vehicle Owner must examine any
hand-written Trip Record and must enter the date and time in ink.
      (4)   The Vehicle Owner must also enter and sign a statement indicating
that the Driver's entries have been examined.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-18(f)(3)-(4)
 
   (g)   Correcting Mistakes on Hand-Written Trip Sheets.
      (1)   The Vehicle Owner must correct wrong entries on a written Trip
Record (or any other written records Owner is required to maintain) by drawing
a single line through the incorrect entry and initialing the correction.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner must not make erasures or obliterate or omit any
essential information.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30 Appearance NOT required
60A-18(g)
 
§ 60A-19 Records – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Current Mailing Address and E-mail Address.
      (1)   A Paratransit Vehicle Owner must have a current E-mail Address at
all times.
      (2)   The Mailing Address for a Paratransit Vehicle Owner must be either
a designated post office box, or one of the following:
         (i)   The home address for an individual Vehicle Owner
         (ii)   A partner's home address for a partnership Licensee
         (iii)   The address of the secretary of the corporation for a
corporate Licensee.
      (3)   A Paratransit Vehicle Owner must report any change of Mailing
Address or E-mail Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten
days.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60A-19(a)(3)
 
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Paratransit Vehicle Owner.
   (b)   24-hour Communication Device.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must maintain a current telephone number on file
with the Commission.
      (2)   This number must be connected to an answering machine or must be a
pager number, answering service number or something similar that allows the
Commission to contact the Vehicle Owner on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-19(b)
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 60A-20 Records – Additional Records to be Maintained.
   (a)   Financial and Operational Records. A Vehicle Owner must maintain
complete financial and other operational records for a period of three years.
The records must be available to the Commission for inspection and must include
the following:
      (1)   Vehicle liability insurance coverage
      (2)   Any other documents specifically prepared in connection with the
operation of a Paratransit Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-20(a)
 
§ 60A-21 Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Give Drivers Access to Records for Reporting. A Vehicle Owner must
make available to a Driver any records that the Vehicle Owner is required to
maintain, if a Driver is required to bring those records to the Commission or
any other Government agency.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-21(a)
 
   (b)   Lost Property.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must look inside the Paratransit Vehicle after each
work shift for anything passengers have forgotten.
      (2)   If property is found and the rightful owner is known or can be
easily determined, the Vehicle Owner must notify the rightful owner within a
reasonable time.
      (3)   If the rightful owner cannot be determined, the lost property must
be taken without delay to the police precinct where the garage is located.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance NOT required
60A-21(b)
 
   (c)   Lost Property Notification. The Vehicle Owner must promptly inform the
Commission of any property found and taken to a police precinct.
   (d)   Notification of Change of Status. A Vehicle Owner must report any
important changes, including any changes regarding Vehicle ownership, title,
financing and registration, to the Commission within 72 hours.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-21(d)
 
§ 60A-22 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Overcharges.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must not charge or attempt to charge a fare above
the approved rate of fare currently filed with the Commission.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner must not impose or attempt to impose any additional
charge for transporting a Person with a Disability, a service animal
accompanying a Person with a Disability, or a wheelchair or other mobility aid.

 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalty: See 35 RCNY §
60A-22(a)   60A-02(d)
 
§ 60A-23 Operations – E-ZPass.
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-24 Operations – Miscellaneous Requirements.
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-25 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Inspection of Paratransit Vehicles.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner is responsible for ensuring that all repairs
discovered by the Base Owner during Base Owner's inspection are made before
allowing a Driver to operate the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $500 Appearance NOT required
60A-25(a)(1)
 
      (2)   The Commission can inspect any Vehicle at any time.
   (b)   Approved Paratransit Vehicles. A Vehicle Owner must only allow
vehicles that have been inspected and approved by the New York State Department
of Transportation to be dispatched.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $500 Appearance NOT required
60A-25(b)
 
   (c)   Compliance with NYSDOT Rules. A Vehicle Owner must comply with the New
York State Department of Transportation regulations and inspection requirements
and schedules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-25(c)
 
§ 60A-26 Vehicle Condition – Safety.
   (a)   Compliance with Notices to Correct Defects. A Vehicle Owner must
comply with all Commission notices, summonses, and directives to correct
defects in a Paratransit Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-26(a)
 
   (b)   Timely Repairs. A Vehicle Owner must make all repairs or alterations
that the New York State Department of Transportation requires to meet its
specifications or to maintain proper standards of safety and comfort. These
repairs or alterations must be made within the time period given by the state
inspectors.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-26(b)
 
   (c)   Replacement of Unsafe or Unfit Vehicles.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must replace a Paratransit Vehicle when the New
York State Department of Transportation determines that the Vehicle is unsafe
or unfit for use as a Paratransit Vehicle and directs the Owner to remove it
from service immediately.
      (2)   If a Vehicle Owner fails to replace the Vehicle within 120 days of
notice, the Commission will consider it as abandonment of the Paratransit
Vehicle License and the Commission can initiate revocation proceedings.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $500 and/or suspension for 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(c)
 
   (d)   Handling of Infectious Disease.
      (1)   Handling Passengers with Infectious Diseases. Owners and Drivers
must obey all Government laws, rules and regulations, regarding the handling of
passengers with infectious diseases.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(1) revocation (OATH)
 
      (2)   Compliance with Rules. Owners must obey all Government laws, rules
and regulations, regarding what must be provided to the Driver or passengers
when transporting passengers with infectious diseases (e.g. masks, gloves,
etc.).
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(2) revocation (OATH)
 
      (3)   Protective Clothing. The Vehicle Owner must provide protective
clothing, (goggles, gloves, gowns, and masks) to any employee who disinfects
the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(3) revocation
 
      (4)   Cleaning of Vehicle after Transportation.
         (i)   Owners and Drivers must obey all Government laws, rules and
regulations, regarding the cleaning of Paratransit Vehicles after transporting
passengers with infectious diseases and the disposal of contaminated materials.
         (ii)   An appropriate disinfectant solution (according to the New York
City Emergency Medical Service and the New York State Department of Health) is:
            A.   One (1) part sodium hypochlorite solution (bleach) to nine (9)
parts water.
            B.   Fill the bucket with water first and then add the solution.
            C.   This solution is incompatible with acids, organic material or
reducing agents; NEVER mix this solution with hydrogen peroxide, ammonia or any
other cleansing agent.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(4) revocation (OATH)
 
      (5)   Stretchers and Linens.
         (i)   If a stretcher is contaminated, clean and disinfect by wiping.
         (ii)   If it is saturated, dispose of it in an appropriate manner.
         (iii)   Dispose of any contaminated linen.
         (iv)   Dispose of contaminated material by placing the items in a
buff-colored impervious plastic bag, seal the bag, tag it as "contaminated" and
dispose of the material in the manner approved at a local hospital.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(5) revocation (OATH)
 
      (6)   Gross Contamination. In the case of gross contamination where the
Vehicle is saturated or encrusted, the Vehicle must be sterilized through the
use of steam gas or liquid agents.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $25 - $1,000 and possible suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
60A-26(d)(6) revocation (OATH)
 
§ 60A-27 Vehicle Condition – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Clean, Painted, Good Appearance. A Vehicle Owner must keep all
Paratransit Vehicles clean, well-painted and in good appearance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-27(a)
 
§ 60A-28 Vehicle – Markings and Advertising.
   (a)   Vehicle Specifications and Markings. A Vehicle Owner must comply with
the markings specifications for Paratransit Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-28(a)
 
   (b)   Remove Markings Before Selling. A Vehicle Owner is responsible for
removing all official markings when selling or disposing of a Paratransit
Vehicle, unless the Owner obtains Commission approval in approved transfers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60A-28(b)
 
   (c)   Required ID Marking. A Valid Commission decal must be attached to the
Vehicle in a plainly visible location when a License is granted, renewed, or
whenever else a new decal is required. The Commission can require the vehicle
to be presented at a Commission facility so that Commission staff can attach
the decal. The Vehicle Owner must also put the company name, trade name and
other vehicle identification markings required by the Commission or New York
State Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-28(c)
 
   (d)   Commercial Use Tax Stamp. A Vehicle Owner must attach a commercial use
motor vehicle tax stamp to the lower right side of the Vehicle windshield, so
that it is plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60A-28(d)
 
   (e)   Unauthorized Advertising. A Vehicle Owner may not display advertising
on the exterior or interior of a Paratransit Vehicle unless the Vehicle Owner
has first obtained Commission authorization.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60A-28(e)
 
   (f)   Required Sticker. Each Paratransit vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing."
The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The
sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. The
sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60A-28(f)(1) and (2)
 
   (g)   Optional Sticker. Paratransit vehicles may display an optional
external sticker, with the following inscription: "The choices you make behind
the wheel matter." The dimensions of the sticker are 15 inches wide by 4 inches
wide. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the
Commission's website or through other appropriate means announced on the
website. If displayed, the sticker must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (h)   Required Sticker. Each Paratransit Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver
Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the
sticker are 8.0 inches wide by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   In a frame on the passenger seat headrest.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
60A-28(h)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (i)   Optional Sticker. Each Paratransit Vehicle may display an external
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are
Protected By New York State Law ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By
Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5
inches wide by 3.5 inches high. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the
instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Exterior, on a door or a side window.
   (j)   Required Decal. Each Paratransit Vehicle with Hearing Induction Loop
capability must display a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature
the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile
of an ear with a wide diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top
right. The symbol contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will
be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will be placed
as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
60A-28(j)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 60A-29 Vehicle – Documents Required in Vehicle.
   (a)   A Vehicle Owner may only permit the operation and the dispatch of a
Paratransit Vehicle when the following are present in the Vehicle:
      (1)   The Driver's written Trip Record.
      (2)   The Driver's Paratransit Driver's License.
      (3)   A copy of the registration certificate.
      (4)   A copy of the Paratransit Vehicle License.
      (5)   A copy of the individual vehicle insurance card.
      (6)   A copy of the lease card or agreement, if any.
      (7)   All required notices.
      (8)   A two-way radio, if the Paratransit Base Owner uses a radio system.
      (9)   An electronic Trip Record system.
      (10)   A copy of the receipt issued by the Commission, if any, or other
proof of payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 for each violation Appearance NOT required
60A-29(a)
 
§ 60A-30 Vehicle – Equipment.
   (a)   Only Authorized Equipment.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner must allow the dispatch only of Paratransit
Vehicles outfitted with equipment and devices specifically required by the
Vehicle and Traffic Laws and by the Commission for use in Paratransit Vehicles.
      (2)   The Commission has the authority to approve equipment and devices
other than those described in paragraph (1) upon the request of the Vehicle
Owner.
      (3)   Owner does not need Commission approval to install additional
mobility devices such as grab bars or non-slip flooring.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30 - $300 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-30(a)   days
 
§ 60A-31 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions.
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-32 Vehicle Equipment – In-Vehicle Camera System.
[Reserved.]
§ 60A-33 Vehicle Equipment – Electronic Trip Record System.
   (a)   Must Be Installed. A Vehicle Owner must install Electronic Trip Record
Systems in all Paratransit Vehicles owned by Owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT required
60A-33(a)
 
   (b)   Must Be in Good Working Order. A Vehicle Owner must not allow a
Paratransit Vehicle to be dispatched unless the Electronic Trip Record System
in the Vehicle is in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
60A-33(b)
 
   (c)   System Malfunction.
      (1)   If the Electronic Trip Record System malfunctions, the Vehicle
Owner must have the system repaired or replaced within three (3) business days
after the malfunction is reported to the Commissions Safety and Emissions
facility.
      (2)   A Vehicle Owner can dispatch a Paratransit Vehicle in which the
Electronic Trip Record System does not work, only:
         (i)   For three business days after the malfunction was reported to
Safety and Emissions.
         (ii)   If a hand-written Trip Record is used in place of the
Electronic Trip Record.
§ 60A-34 Vehicle Retirement Dates.
   (a)   On and after January 1, 2009, all Paratransit Vehicles that are of
model year 2000 or earlier must be retired from Paratransit service no later
than the expiration dates of their Paratransit Vehicle Licenses.
   (b)   On and after January 1, 2010, all Paratransit Vehicles that are of
model year 2002 or earlier must be retired from paratransit service no later
than the expiration dates of their Paratransit Vehicle Licenses.
   (c)   On and after January 1, 2011, all Paratransit Vehicles that are of
model year 2004 or earlier must be retired from paratransit service no later
than the expiration dates of their Paratransit Vehicle Licenses.
   (d)   On and after January 1, 2012, all Paratransit Vehicles must be retired
no later than seven years after the Vehicle was first licensed.
   (e)   Mandatory Retirement.
      (1)   A Paratransit Vehicle that cannot pass the New York State
Department of Transportation inspection must be retired, regardless of whether
its retirement date has been reached.
      (2)   A Paratransit Vehicle which has reached its retirement date must be
retired, regardless of whether it may still pass the New York State Department
of Transportation inspection.
   (f)   Extension of Time for Retirement.
      (1)   A Vehicle Owner can request an extension of a Vehicle's retirement
date.
      (2)   Any request for an extension of the retirement date must be made at
least two months before that date.
      (3)   The extension request must include documentation demonstrating
that:
         (i)   A new vehicle has been ordered.
         (ii)   The new vehicle will not be delivered until after the
retirement date.
         (iii)   The new vehicle will be delivered no later than 60 days after
the retirement date.
      (4)   If the Vehicle Owner's documentation is complete and accurate, the
retirement date of the Vehicle will be extended to the projected delivery date
of the new vehicle. The Chairperson may confirm the completeness and accuracy
of the documentation.
**** Subchapter 60B: Paratransit Base Station Owners ****
§ 60B-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining and
maintaining a Paratransit Base Station Owner's License.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violation of the requirements of maintaining
a Paratransit Base Station Owner's License.
§ 60B-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Mandatory Penalties. The following violations incur mandatory
penalties:
      (1)   The following violations incur mandatory penalties:
 
Description of Rule        Mandatory Penalty for All Violations 
Violation 
8. Operation   35 RCNY §
of unlicensed  60B-10(a)
vehicle
9. driver      35 RCNY §
unlicensed by  60B-10(b)
TLC                        • First violation: $100 - $350
10. Driver
unlicensed by              • Second violation (any combination of provisions) within 24 months: $350 -
State and/or   35 RCNY §  $500
has not        60B-10(c)/
qualified as   60B-10(d)   • Third violation (any combination of provisions) within 24 months: Mandatory
Article 19-                Revocation of License
A "bus driver"
11. Passenger
pick-ups only  35 RCNY §
on prearranged 60B-16(a)
basis; no
"hails"
 
      (2)   The 24-month period will be counted backward from the date of the
most recent conviction.
      (3)   The License of any Licensee who has five (or more) open and
outstanding summonses for a 12-month period, will be revoked. The 12-month
period will be counted from the date the earliest summons was issued.
§ 60B-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Paratransit Base Station License.
   (b)   [Reserved.]
   (c)   Base Affiliation. Each Paratransit Vehicle must be associated with a
specific Paratransit Base and work only with the Base with which it is
affiliated.
   (d)   Base (or Base Station) refers to Paratransit Base Station.
   (e)   Base Owner (or Owner) refers to the owner of a Paratransit Base
Station.
   (f)   Business Entity. A Paratransit Business Entity can be a corporation, a
partnership or a limited liability company.
   (g)   Driver in this Subchapter means the Driver of a Paratransit Vehicle.
   (h)   Electronic Trip Record System is the hardware and software that
collects and stores the data required to be collected and kept for each
passenger trip.
   (i)   License in this Subchapter means a License for a Paratransit Base
Station.
   (j)   Licensee refers to a Paratransit Base Station Licensee.
   (k)   Rate Schedule is the official list of rates and rules concerning the
rates that a Paratransit Base Station is permitted to charge a passenger.
   (l)   Trip Record (or Trip Sheet) refers to the hand-written or electronic
collection of data that is required to be kept for each passenger trip.
   (m)   Vehicle refers to a Paratransit Vehicle.
§ 60B-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Identification. An individual Applicant or an Applicant's Business
Entity Persons applying for a new (original) Base Station License must provide
both of the following:
      (1)   A Valid Government photo ID
      (2)   A Valid social security number.
   (b)   Fingerprinting. The Applicant and all corporate officers and active
stockholders of a corporate Applicant must be fingerprinted at the Commission.
   (c)   Complete Application Forms. The Applicant must complete and file the
required application forms.
   (d)   Requirements concerning Paratransit Vehicles.
      (1)   The application for a Base License must be accompanied by at least
one Paratransit Vehicle License application.
      (2)   The Applicant must ensure that any affiliated Paratransit Vehicle
being licensed for the first time submits a New York State Department of
Transportation Form MC300, dated within one month of the application date,
proving that the Vehicle meets the relevant mileage requirement:
         (i)   On and after January 1, 2009, a vehicle must have fewer than
50,000 miles.
         (ii)   On and after January 1, 2010, a vehicle must have fewer than
25,000 miles.
         (iii)   On and after January 1, 2011, a vehicle must be of the most
recent model year or the immediately preceding model year and must have fewer
than 500 miles.
   (e)   Additional Documents Required.
      (1)   A copy of the Applicant's New York State Department of
Transportation Certificate of public convenience and necessity to operate as a
common carrier of passengers by motor vehicle (operating authority).
      (2)   The copy of the current Rate Schedule.
      (3)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
         (i)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the
clerk of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is
located.
         (ii)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file
with its application:
            A.   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
            B.   A list of officers and shareholders
            C.   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
         (iii)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a
limited liability company, it must file with its application:
            A.   A copy of its articles of organization
            B.   A copy of its operating agreement
            C.   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (f)   Additional Requirements. An Applicant for a Base Station License must
show that:
      (1)   The Base will be located on commercial property or other
appropriately-zoned location unless the Base will operate no more than four (4)
vehicles, in which case it can be maintained at the Base Owner's residence.
      (2)   The Base will be maintained as a separate entity.
      (3)   The Base will maintain outside advertising identifying the premises
as a Paratransit Base Station and providing its business name and phone number.
   (g)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (h)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (i)   Fit to Hold License. An Applicant, including all persons who must be
fingerprinted as specified by paragraph (b) of this section, must demonstrate
that they are Fit to Hold a License to operate a Base Station.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 60B-05 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New Licenses. The term of a new Base License is three years.
   (b)   Renewals. The renewal term of a Base License is three years from the
date on which the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File Application for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 60B-06 Licensing – License and Administrative Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a Paratransit Base License is $500
annually.
   (b)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee
of $25 for each License it issues to replace a lost or mutilated License.
   (c)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves an application.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 60B-07 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   No Longer Meets Requirements. The Commission will deny a Base Owner's
renewal application or suspend or revoke a License if the Commission learns
that the Owner no longer meets the Base License requirements.
   (b)   Prior License Revocation. The Commission will not issue any License to
any individual or Business Entity that has had its license revoked until at
least one year following the date of the revocation.
   (c)   Misleading Trade Name. The Commission will not issue a License to a
Business Entity with a corporate or trade name similar to a name already in use
by another Paratransit Base Station Owner.
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application by the
expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
§ 60B-08 Licensing – Transfer of Base License.
   (a)   A Base Owner must notify and get prior approval from the Commission
before transferring, selling, or assigning the Base to another.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60B-08(a)
 
   (b)   The prospective new Base Owner must file the appropriate Base
application form with the Commission.
   (c)   Upon approval of the transfer, the Commission will permit the entire
fleet to be transferred to the new Base as long as the Vehicles meet the age
retirement requirements established in 35 RCNY §
60A-34.
   (d)   The Transferee must pay the paratransit affiliation fee to the
Commission, if any is required.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60B-08(d)
 
§ 60B-09 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-10 Compliance with Laws – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Vehicle Must Be Licensed. A Base Station Owner must not dispatch or
allow a vehicle to be operated if the vehicle does not have a Valid Paratransit
Vehicle License.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties. See 35 RCNY §   
60B-10(a)   60B-02(d)
 
   (b)   Driver Must Have a Paratransit License. A Base Station Owner must not
dispatch a driver who does not have a Valid Paratransit Driver's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60B-10(b)   60B-02(d)
 
   (c)   Driver Must Have State Driver's License. A Base Station Owner must not
dispatch a driver who does not have a Valid state driver's license.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60B-10(c)   60B-02(d)
 
   (d)   Compliance with § 509-d. A Base Station Owner must not allow a Vehicle
to be dispatched or operated by a driver who has not complied with § 509-d of
Article 19-A of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law (regarding
requirements for bus drivers).
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties See 35 RCNY §   
60B-10(d)   60B-02(d)
 
   (e)   Base Must Be Licensed. A base, and any owner of a base, must not
dispatch any Paratransit Vehicle or act as a Base if the base does not have a
Valid Base Station License, unless it has been exempted by the New York State
Department of Transportation.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT required
60B-10(e)
 
   (f)   Activity After License Expiration. Any activity to provide paratransit
service after the Vehicle License has expired and before a renewal License has
been issued is considered "unlicensed activity" and is subject to the penalties
in these Rules and in the Administrative Code.
§ 60B-11 Compliance with Laws – Worker's Compensation.
   (a)   Compliance with Workers' Compensation Law. A Base Station Owner must
comply with all provisions of the New York State Workers' Compensation law and
regulations, and provide coverage and benefits to all eligible employees.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance and
60B-11(a)   either suspension until compliance or license Appearance REQUIRED
            revocation
 
§ 60B-12 Compliance with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery. A Base Station Applicant or Licensee must not offer or give
any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or member
of the Commission or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(a)
 
   (b)   Failure to Report Bribery. A Base Station Owner must immediately
report to the Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of
value by any employee, representative or member of the Commission or any other
public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(b)   revocation
 
   (c)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Base Station Owner, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, any act of
fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(c)   days or revocation.
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Base Station Owner, a Licensee must not deliberately fail
to perform any act, alone or with another, where this failure is against the
best interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(d)   days or revocation.
 
   (e)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Base Station Owner, a Licensee must not perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(e)   days or revocation.
 
   (f)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Base Station Owner, a Licensee must not:
      (1)   Threaten, harass, or abuse any person;
      (2)   Distract, or attempt to distract a Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(f)   days
 
   (g)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Base Station Owner or any act in connection with those
duties, a Licensee must not harm, use or attempt to harm or use any physical
force against a person or Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $20 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days; possible  
60B-12(g)   revocation (OATH)
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Base Station Owner must notify the Commission within 15 calendar
days after any criminal conviction of the Licensee, individually or, if the
Licensee is a Business Entity, of any Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The Owner must also provide the Commission with a certified copy of
the certificate issued by the clerk of the court explaining what happened as a
result of the conviction within 15 days after the certificate is issued.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(h)
 
   (i)   Failure to Cooperate with Commission Enforcement. A Base Station Owner
must cooperate with all Commission enforcement officers and all authorized
representatives of the Commission. Cooperation includes, but is not limited to,
responding to a request for the Licensee's name, License number, and any
documents Licensee is required to have in his or her possession.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(i)
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Base Station Owner must promptly and truthfully answer all
questions and comply with all communications, directives, and summonses issued
by the Commission or its representatives.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
60B-12(j)(1)
 
      (2)   A Base Station Owner must respond to any contact from the
Commission within forty-eight hours, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT required
60B-12(j)(2)
 
   (k)   Courtesy. Owners must be courteous toward passengers and the general
public, including Commission personnel, while performing their duties and
responsibilities as Owners.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60B-12(k)
 
   (l)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. While performing the
duties and responsibilities of a Base Station Owner, a Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60B-12(l)
 
   (m)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A Paratransit Base must not retaliate against any Driver for making
a good faith complaint against any Base.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first violation and a
60B-12(m)   fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second violation within five
            years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015)
§ 60B-13 Compliance with Laws – Miscellaneous.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-14 Operations – Business Premises.
   (a)   Location of Business. The Base must be located on commercial property
or other appropriately-zoned location. If the Base operates four or fewer
vehicles, it can be maintained at the Base Owner's residence.
   (b)   Required Outside Signage. The Base must maintain outside advertising
stating the business name and telephone number and indicating to the public
that it is a Paratransit Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-14(b)
 
   (c)   Record Maintenance. The Base must maintain Trip Records of all
Paratransit Vehicles dispatched.
§ 60B-15 Operations – Management Oversight (Use of Agents).
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-16 Operations – Service Requirements (Passengers).
   (a)   Prohibited Pickups. A Base Owner must only dispatch Drivers to pick up
passengers on a prearrangement basis. Base Owners must not allow Drivers to
solicit or respond to hails.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory Penalties. See 35 RCNY §   
60B-16(a)   60B-02(d)
 
   (b)   Timely Pickups. Base Owners must schedule and dispatch the daily trips
as efficiently as possible, to avoid unreasonably late pickups and missed
trips.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60B-16(b)
 
   (c)   Notify Passenger of Delay. If a pickup is unreasonably delayed or
cancelled, the Base Owner (or Vehicle Owner) must promptly notify the waiting
passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-16(c)
 
   (d)   Monitor Drivers' Behavior. Base Owners must monitor the behavior and
conduct of the Drivers toward the passengers, investigate passenger complaints,
and take appropriate action to resolve the complaints.
 
            Fine: $50 - $250 and/or suspension until a
35 RCNY §  monitoring procedure is devised and/or other    Appearance REQUIRED
60B-16(d)   appropriate action is taken to the satisfaction
            of the Commission
 
§ 60B-17 Operations – Owners' Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Maximum Hours of Work for Drivers. A Base Owner must not require a
Driver to operate a Paratransit Vehicle more than (12) consecutive hours.
However, if a Driver has accepted a passenger prior to the conclusion of the
twelfth hour the Driver can complete that trip provided he or she is able to
drive safely.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-17(a)
 
   (b)   Familiarize Employees with Rules and Regulations.
      (1)   Base Owners must ensure that all Drivers (and other employees) are
familiar with the rules that govern Driver conduct and aware of any changes
made to those rules.
      (2)   Base Owners must maintain a current copy of the Commission Rules at
the Base for the information of Drivers and employees.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-17(b)
 
§ 60B-18 Records – Trip Record Information (Electronic).
   (a)   Required Information. Base Owners must not dispatch a Paratransit
Vehicle unless it is equipped with an Electronic Trip Record System that
electronically collects all of the following trip data:
      (1)   The Paratransit Driver's license number.
      (2)   The Paratransit Vehicle's state license plate number.
      (3)   The date and time of pick-up of each passenger.
      (4)   The date and time of drop-off of each passenger.
      (5)   The locations of pick-ups and drop-offs.
      (6)   Any other entries required by the Commission and local, state or
federal law.
NOTE: When the Electronic Trip Record System is operable, the Driver will use
the system to record entries for the locations, dates and time of pick-ups and
drop-offs, at the times they occur; the Base Owner is permitted to make all
other entries
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT required
60B-18(a)
 
   (b)   Transmit Monthly. All data required under subdivision (a) above must
be electronically transmitted to the Commission on a monthly basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 if plead guilty before a
60B-18(b)   hearing; $1,000 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT required
            hearing. Suspension until compliance.
 
   (c)   Corrections. The Base Owner must make all necessary corrections and
additions to the Electronic Trip Record System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30 Appearance NOT required
60B-18(c)
 
   (d)   No Deletions or Alterations. The Base Owner must not permit the
electronic trip record data collected in the Paratransit Vehicle to be erased,
deleted, altered, changed or obliterated.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $30 Appearance NOT required
60B-18(d)
 
§ 60B-19 Records – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Current Mailing and Email Address.
      (1)   The Mailing Address for a Paratransit Base Station must be either
the address of the Base Station or a designated post office box.
      (2)   A Paratransit Base Station must have a working Email Address at all
times.
      (3)   A Paratransit Base Station must report any change of Mailing
Address or Email Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten
days.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60B-19(a)(2)-(3)
 
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Paratransit Base Station.
      (5)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Paratransit Base Station.
   (b)   24-hour Communication Device.
      (1)   A Base Owner must maintain a current telephone number on file with
the Commission.
      (2)   This number must be connected to an answering machine or must be a
pager number, answering service number or something similar that allows the
Commission to contact the Base Owner on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT required
60B-19(b)
 
§ 60B-20 Records – Additional Records to be Maintained.
   (a)   Financial and Operational Records. A Base Owner must maintain complete
financial and other operational records for a period of three years. The
records must be available to the Commission for inspection and must include the
following:
      (1)   The driver's trip records
      (2)   Any workers' compensation insurance coverage
      (3)   Any other documents created or maintained in conjunction with the
operation of a Base
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-20(a)
 
§ 60B-21 Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Report Rate Changes. A Base Owner must file the Rate Schedule with the
Commission annually or at least ten (10) days prior to the effective date of
any change.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-21(a)
 
   (b)   Give Drivers Access to Records for Reporting. A Base Owner must
provide a Driver with access to any records (or copies of the records) that the
Base is required to maintain, if a Driver is required to bring those records
(or copies) to the Commission or any other Government agency.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-21(b)
 
   (c)   Report Change of Status. A Base Owner must report any important
changes, including a change in the Base address, to the Commission within 72
hours.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-21(c)
 
§ 60B-22 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Must file Rate Schedule. A Base Owner must not dispatch a Paratransit
Vehicle unless the Rate Schedule for the Paratransit Vehicle has been filed
with the Commission.
   (b)   Must List Rate Schedule. The Rate Schedule must include the minimum
fare, different fares for different types of paratransit services, portal time,
tolls and extra charges, if any.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-22
 
§ 60B-23 Operations – E-ZPass.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-24 Operations – Miscellaneous Requirements.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-25 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Equipment Must be in Good Working Order. A Base Owner must not
dispatch a Paratransit Vehicle until the Base Owner inspects and reasonably
determines that all equipment is in good working order and meets all
requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and these Commission
Rules.
   (b)   Equipment to be Inspected. Equipment to be inspected includes, but is
not limited to, brakes, tires, lights, signals, wheelchair ramps, fastening
devices, and heating and ventilation units.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $500 Appearance NOT required
60B-25
 
§ 60B-26 Vehicle Condition – Safety.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-27 Vehicle Condition – Miscellaneous.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-28 Vehicle – Markings and Advertising.
   (a)   Vehicle Specifications and Markings. A Base Owner must comply with the
markings specifications for Paratransit Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-28(a)
 
   (b)   Required ID Marking. A Base Owner must ensure that each Vehicle
affiliated with the Base has a Valid Commission Decal attached to and plainly
visible on the exterior of the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-28(b)
 
   (c)   Commercial Use Tax Stamp. A Base Owner must confirm that the vehicle
has a commercial use motor vehicle tax stamp attached to the lower right side
of the Vehicle windshield, and is plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT required
60B-28(c)
 
   (d)   Unauthorized Advertising. A Base Owner must not display advertising on
the exterior or interior of a Paratransit Vehicle unless the Base Owner has
first obtained Commission authorization.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT required
60B-28(d)
 
   (e)   Required Sticker. A Base Owner must ensure that each Vehicle
affiliated with the Base displays an internal safety sticker, with the
following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing." The dimensions of the
sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
60B-28(e)(1) and (2)
 
   (f)   Optional Sticker. A Base Owner may permit Vehicles affiliated with the
Base to display an optional external sticker, with the following inscription:
"The choices you make behind the wheel matter." The dimensions of the sticker
are 15 inches wide by 4 inches wide. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to
the instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. If displayed, the sticker must be placed on the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (g)   Required Sticker. A Base Owner must ensure that each Vehicle
affiliated with the Base displays an internal safety sticker, with the
following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By Up to
Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 8.0 inches wide
by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions
on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means announced on the
website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   In a frame on the passenger seat headrest.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
60B-28(g)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (h)   Optional Sticker. A Base Owner may permit Vehicles affiliated with the
Base to display an optional external safety sticker, with the following
inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are Protected By New York State Law
ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in
Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 3.5 inches high.
The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. The
sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Exterior, on a door or a side window.
   (i)   Required Decal. A Base Owner must ensure that each Vehicle with
Hearing Induction Loop capability that is affiliated with the Base must display
a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature the International Symbol
of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile of an ear with a wide
diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top right. The symbol
contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will be placed in the
lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will be placed as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
60B-28(i)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 60B-29 Vehicle – Documents Required in Vehicle.
   (a)   A Base Owner must only permit the operation and the dispatch of a
Paratransit Vehicle when the following are present in the Vehicle:
      (1)   The Trip Record.
      (2)   The Driver's Paratransit Driver's License.
      (3)   A copy of the registration certificate.
      (4)   A copy of the Paratransit Vehicle License.
      (5)   A copy of the individual Vehicle insurance card.
      (6)   A copy of the lease card or agreement, if any.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 for each violation Appearance NOT required
60B-29(a)
 
§ 60B-30 Vehicle – Equipment.
   (a)   Two-way Radio. If a Base Owner uses a radio system, the Base Owner
must only permit a Paratransit Vehicle to be dispatched and operated when it
has a two-way radio in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $15 Appearance NOT required
60B-30(a)
 
   (b)   FCC Compliant Two-way Radio. A Base Owner operating a two-way radio
service must instruct the Drivers and other employees on the two-way radio
service rules of the Federal Communications Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-30(b)
 
§ 60B-31 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-32 Vehicle Equipment – In-Vehicle Camera System.
[Reserved.]
§ 60B-33 Vehicle Equipment – Electronic Trip Record System.
   (a)   Install System. Base Owners must ensure that all Paratransit Vehicles
affiliated with the Base are equipped with an Electronic Trip Record System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT required
60B-33(a)
 
   (b)   System Must be in Good Working Order. A Base Owner must not dispatch a
Paratransit Vehicle unless the Electronic Trip Record System in the Paratransit
Vehicle is in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-33(b)
 
   (c)   System Malfunction.
      (1)   The Base Owner must report any malfunction of the electronic trip
record system to the Commission's Safety and Emissions Facility within twenty-
four (24) hours of when the Base Owner knew or should have known of the
malfunction.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $250 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-33(c)(1)
 
      (2)   The Base Owner must dispatch a Paratransit Vehicle in which the
Electronic Trip Record System does not work, only:
         (i)   For three business days after the malfunction was timely
reported to Safety and Emissions.
         (ii)   If a hand-written Trip Record is used in place of the
electronic Trip Record.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $250 Appearance REQUIRED
60B-33(c)(2)
 
Chapter 61: Commuter Van Vehicles and Owners
**** Subchapter 61A: Commuter-Van Vehicle Owners ****
§ 61A-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining and
maintaining a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner's License.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violation of the requirements of maintaining
a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner's License.
   (c)   All Rules in this Subchapter apply to the Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner,
and the penalties included will be assessed against the Commuter-Van Vehicle
Owner. When a Rule references that another party is also responsible, unless
otherwise clearly stated, the responsibility is joint and several and both
parties may be held entirely responsible for a violation of the Rule.
§ 61A-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Effect of Suspension or Revocation of Service Authorization on
Affiliated Commuter-Van Vehicle Owners.
      (1)   Any Vehicle affiliated with a Commuter-Van Service whose
Authorization has been suspended or revoked will have its License suspended or
revoked if the suspension or revocation was based in whole or in part on the
actions of the Commuter-Van Vehicle.
      (2)   If the suspension or revocation was not based on the actions of the
Commuter-Van Vehicle, the Vehicle's License will remain Valid. However, the
Vehicle must not operate until it has formed an affiliation with another
authorized Commuter-Van Service.
   (e)   Mandatory Penalties. 
 
                                                          Penalty, after
Section     Violation              Cumulative Criteria    opportunity for
                                                          Hearing
                                   Failure to maintain
35 RCNY §  Failure to maintain    the required liability Revocation of Vehicle
61A-11(b)   proper insurance       insurance three or     License
                                   more times within one
                                   year.
                                   Operating without
            Failure to comply with complying with any
35 RCNY §  safety inspection      safety inspection      Revocation of Vehicle
61A-26      requirements           requirement three or   License
                                   more times within one
                                   year.
 
§ 61A-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Commuter-Van Vehicle License.
   (b)   Authorization means the Commission's approval to operate a Commuter-
Van Service within the geographic boundaries specified by the Commission.
   (c)   Driver in this Subchapter refers to a Commuter-Van Vehicle Driver.
   (d)   License in this Subchapter means a Commuter-Van Vehicle License.
   (e)   Official Bus Route in this Subchapter means the route, including all
stops, traveled upon by a bus line that is operated by:
      (1)   The New York City Transit Authority
      (2)   The City of New York, or
      (3)   A private bus company that has been approved by local law or
Charter provision enacted in accordance with § 80-4 of the Transportation Law.
   (f)   Owner in this Subchapter refers to a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner. An
Owner can be a Business Entity or a person. The term Owner in this Subchapter,
in addition to complete ownership of the Vehicle, includes those individuals or
entities with the following ownership interests:
      (1)   Entitlement to the use and possession of a Vehicle subject to a
security interest held by another, regardless of the terms of the contract.
(Owner does NOT include any party with a security interest in a Vehicle that is
not in that party's possession.)
      (2)   The right, by any lessee or bailee, to exclusive use of the Vehicle
for more than 30 days.
   (g)   Vehicle, when used alone in this Subchapter, means a Licensed
Commuter-Van Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] ID.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (c)   Fingerprinting to Verify Good Moral Character.
      (1)   An Applicant for a Commuter-Van License must be fingerprinted for
the purpose of securing criminal history records from the NYS Division of
Criminal Justice Services.
      (2)   Fingerprints will be taken of all of the Applicant's Limited
Business Entity Persons.
      (3)   If the Applicant intends to add or change any additional Limited
Business Entity Persons, the Applicant must apply for the Commission's approval
within five days of the change or addition.
      (4)   Any additional Limited Business Entity Persons must be
fingerprinted either before or during the Commission's approval process.
      (5)   The Applicant must pay any processing fee required by the State.
   (d)   Fitness to Hold License. No Commuter-Van License can be issued or
renewed unless an Applicant demonstrates that the Applicant is Fit to Hold a
License to operate a Commuter-Van Vehicle.
   (e)   Designate Drivers as Agents for Service. An Applicant must agree that
any Driver who operates one of Owner's Commuter-Van Vehicles will be considered
an agent of the Owner for purposes of accepting service of any and all legal
process issued by any department of the City of New York.
   (f)   Vehicle Liability Insurance. No Commuter-Van Vehicle License will be
issued or renewed unless the Applicant proves that the Vehicle is properly
registered and has the insurance coverage required in 35 RCNY §
61A-11.
   (g)   Forms and Filing. An application for a Commuter-Van Vehicle License or
renewal must be submitted on forms provided by the Commission, signed by the
applicant, and personally filed with the Commission.
   (h)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (i)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (j)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address.
   (k)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax applicable to the Applicant's Vehicle. If
the Applicant has not made payment to the NYS DMV, the Applicant must pay the
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the Commission.
      (2)   An Applicant who has already paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
must provide proof of payment in the form of a copy of the New York State
issued registration receipt or a receipt from the New York City Department of
Finance.
§ 61A-05 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New Licenses. The term of a new Vehicle License is two years.
   (b)   Renewals. The renewal term of a Vehicle License is two years from the
date on which the previous License expired.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date will not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid after
the License expiration date until the application for renewal is approved by
the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 60 days
after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a late
fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid until the application for renewal is approved by the
Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 60 days after the expiration
date.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-06 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a Commuter-Van Vehicle License will be
$275 annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied.
      (1)   The Commission will not refund the application fee if it denies or
disapproves the application.
      (2)   However, if disapproval of the Vehicle License is based on
disapproval of the affiliated Commuter-Van Service Authorization, the vehicle
application fee will be refunded.
   (d)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee
of $25 for each License it issues to replace a lost or mutilated License.
   (e)   Vehicle Transfer Fees.
      (1)   A Vehicle Licensee can change the Vehicle's affiliation from one
Commuter-Van Service Authorization to another after approval by the Chairperson
and payment of a $25 fee.
      (2)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the License from one vehicle to
another after approval by the by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (3)   A Vehicle Licensee can replace the license plates on the Vehicle
after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (4)   A Vehicle Licensee can transfer the license plates from one vehicle
to another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (5)   A Vehicle Licensee must pay a separate fee for each type of vehicle
transfer. This is true even if the Vehicle Licensee wants to do several types
of vehicle transfer all at one time.
   (f)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application, if it allows the filing at all.
   (g)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   For Licenses Issued on or after June 1, 2012 if Tax NOT paid to NYS
DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800,
to be paid with the application for the license.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (2)   At License Renewal for Licenses Expiring on or after June 1, 2012
if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV.
         (i)   The Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax for each Vehicle will be $800
for each renewal License period. The tax must be paid with the renewal
application.
         (ii)   No additional payment will be required for any replacement
Vehicle during the renewal License Period.
         (iii)   If the Applicant paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
directly to NYS DMV, this paragraph does not apply.
      (3)   Interim Payments for licenses expiring on or after June 1, 2012 and
before June 1, 2014 if Tax NOT paid to NYS DMV. An interim payment of the
Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax is due on June 1, 2012 for licenses expiring on or
after June 1, 2012 and before June 1, 2014, provided that the Licensee has not
paid the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax to the NYS DMV.
         (ii)   The amount of the interim payment is:
If a license expires during:            The licensee must make an interim
                                        payment of:
June, July or August 2012               $100
September, October or November 2012     $200
December 2012, January 2013 or February $300
2013
March, April or May 2013                $400
June, July or August 2013               $500
September, October or November 2013     $600
December 2013, January 2014 or February $700
2014
March, April or May 2014                $800
 
      (4)   Refunds.
         (i)   The Commission will not refund any payment of Commercial Motor
Vehicle Tax.
         (ii)   Applications for refunds, including but not limited to refunds
upon transfer, surrender or termination, must be made to the NYC Department of
Finance. The application will be reviewed in accordance with the Administrative
Code and the Rules of the NYC Department of Finance.
§ 61A-07 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Material Misrepresentation. The Commission can deny an application if
the Applicant has made a material false statement or concealed a material fact
relating to the application.
   (b)   Conduct Prohibited by Rules. The Commission can deny an application if
the Applicant has engaged in any conduct that would be a basis for suspension
or revocation of the License under the Rules in this Subchapter.
   (c)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 45
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
60 days of the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (d)   Refusal to Renew. The Commission can refuse to renew a Commuter-Van
Vehicle License for additional reasons, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has violated any provision of these Rules or any of the rules
relating to commuter van service in Chapter 5, Title 19 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has engaged in any fraud or misrepresentation in connection with
providing any transportation service.
      (3)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons has
failed to pay any penalty that has been properly imposed under these Rules.
      (4)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons has
been convicted of a crime that the Commission believes has a direct bearing
upon the Applicant's fitness or ability to perform the functions required of a
Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, or has been convicted of any offense that under
Article 23-A of the NYS Correction Law would provide a basis for the Commission
to refuse to renew or to suspend or revoke a Commuter-Van Vehicle License.
      (5)   The Applicant has failed to maintain the conditions of operation
that apply to Commuter-Van Vehicle License.
      (6)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has engaged in discrimination according to the provisions of § 8-107
of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application.
   (f)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   The Commission will deny an application, including a renewal
application, if the Applicant owes the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax required
under subdivision (e) of 35 RCNY §
61A-13 on any Vehicle subject to the application.
      (2)   Payment of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax amount described in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision is a condition to issuance of a License,
including a renewal License, and the maintaining of such License.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-08 Licensing – Transfer of License.
   (a)   Not Transferable. A Commuter-Van License is not assignable or
transferable.
§ 61A-09 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-10 Comply with Laws – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Vehicle Must Be Licensed. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must not allow
a vehicle to be operated within the City of New York as a Commuter Van if the
vehicle does not have a Valid License from the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four Appearance
61A-10(a)   months                                                                             REQUIRED
 
   (b)   Vehicle Must Be Affiliated with Authorized Commuter-Van Service. A
Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must not allow Owner's Vehicle to be operated within
the City of New York unless it is affiliated with a Validly Authorized
Commuter-Van Service.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 – first violation; $2,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-fAppearance
61A-10(b)   months                                                                           NOT
                                                                                             REQUIRED
 
   (c)   Vehicle Must Be Registered and Insured. Failure to comply with the
registration or insurance requirements established in this Subchapter will
create an automatic License suspension as of the date the compliance lapsed,
and any operation of the Vehicle during this time will be considered unlicensed
activity.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four Appearance
61A-10(c)   months                                                                             REQUIRED
 
   (d)   Driver Must Be Licensed. The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner is responsible
for ensuring that anyone operating a Commuter-Van Vehicle in the operation of a
Commuter-Van Service has:
      (1)   A Valid driver's license that qualifies as a Chauffeur's License,
and
      (2)   A Valid Commuter-Van Driver's License.
      (3)   The License of an Owner who allows a Commuter Van to be operated by
anyone without a valid Chauffer's License and a valid Commuter-Van Driver's
License will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and Suspension of Commuter-Van Appearance REQUIRED
61A-10(d)   license until compliance
 
   (e)   No Person Can Operate an Unlicensed Commuter-Van Vehicle or Service.
No person is allowed to operate or to allow anyone else to operate a vehicle
bearing the words "Commuter-Van service", "van service", "Commuter-Van", "van"
or other similar designation unless:
      (1)   The vehicle is a Validly Licensed Commuter Van Vehicle
      (2)   The Vehicle is affiliated with a Validly Authorized Commuter-Van
Service, and
      (3)   The Vehicle is driven by a Validly Licensed Commuter-Van Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four Appearance
61A-10(e)   months                                                                             NOT
(1) and (3)                                                                                    REQUIRED
35 RCNY §                                                                                     Appearance
61A-10(e)   Fine: $1,000 first violation; $2,000 subsequent violations within 24 months        NOT
(2)                                                                                            REQUIRED
 
   (f)   Special Procedures Relating to Unlicensed Commuter-Van Operations.
      (1)   The Commission will notify the NYS Commissioner of Motor Vehicles
upon finding a person liable for:
         (i)   Operating a vehicle without a Valid Commuter-Van Vehicle
License, or
         (ii)   Operating a vehicle that is not affiliated with an Authorized
Commuter-Van Service.
      (2)   Until notified that the violation has been corrected, the Motor
Vehicle Commissioner can:
         (i)   Suspend the vehicle's registration,
         (ii)   Deny any application for the vehicle's registration or
registration renewal,
         (iii)   Take any other action permitted under law.
      (3)   The Commission will also notify the NYS Department of Finance.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-11 Comply with Laws – Vehicle Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   Joint Responsibility. The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner is liable for
ensuring that every Commuter-Van Vehicle owned and operated by Owner is in
compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in this 35 RCNY §
61A-11.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and/or revocation of Commuter-Van Appearance REQUIRED
61A-11(a)   license
 
   (b)   Surety Bond or Policy of Insurance. No Commuter-Van Vehicle can be
used in the operation of a Commuter-Van Service unless it is covered by a
surety bond or a policy of insurance approved as to form by the Commission and
issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in this
State by the Superintendent of Insurance. Each Owner of a Commuter Van must
maintain the following coverage:
      (1)   General Coverage for Commuter Vans with Seating Capacity of Less
than Eight. For the purposes of insurance or other financial security, each
Owner of a Commuter Van with a seating capacity of less than eight passengers
(not including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in
amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $50,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $100,000 minimum liability and $300,000 maximum liability for
bodily injury and death, as those terms are described and defined in section
370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law;
         (iii)   $50,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
      (2)   General Coverage for Commuter Vans with Seating Capacity of Eight
or More. For the purposes of insurance or other financial security, each Owner
of a Commuter Van with a seating capacity of not less than eight passengers
(not including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in
amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $50,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $500,000 minimum liability for bodily injury and death, as
those terms are described and defined in section 370(1) of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law;
         (iii)   $50,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
 
            Fine: $300 and suspension until compliance
35 RCNY §  Three or more violations within one year:
61A-11(b)   License revocation (see Mandatory Penalties 35 Appearance REQUIRED
            RCNY §
            61A-02(e))
 
   (c)   Remain in Effect Until Terminated. Surety bonds and certificates of
insurance must specify that coverage will remain in effect continuously until
terminated as provided in this Subchapter.
   (d)   Conditions for Replacement of Bonds or Insurance. Surety bonds or
certificates of insurance may be replaced, and the liability of the retiring
surety or insurer will be considered terminated as of the effective date of its
replacement, provided that the replacement surety bond or certificate of
insurance meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The new surety bond or certificate of insurance is acceptable to
the Commission.
      (2)   The Commuter-Van Service Owner or an authorized employee of the
Commuter-Van service submits, in duplicate, a letter authorizing the
replacement surety bond or certificate of insurance and verifying its effective
date.
      (3)   The effective date must coincide with the effective date specified
in the letter of authorization, and that date may not be more than 30 days
before the date the Commission receives the letter of authorization and
replacement certificate.
   (e)   Provision for Continuing Liability. Every surety bond or certificate
of insurance must contain a provision for a continuing liability after a claim
has been successfully filed and recovered against the bond or insurance.
   (f)   Notice of Cancellation to the Commission.
      (1)   Every surety bond or certificate of insurance must include a
provision that cancellation will not be effective until at least 30 days after
the Commission has been properly notified in writing of the party's intention
to cancel.
      (2)   Proper notification must be given on or in the relevant Form K –
Uniform Notice of Cancellation of Motor Carrier Insurance Policies or Form L –
Uniform Notice of Cancellation of Motion Carrier Surety Bonds. Copies of these
forms are available at Commission offices.
      (3)   If a cancelled insurance policy or bond is reinstated:
         (i)   A new certificate, in the form required by subdivision (d) of
this section, must be filed with the Commission, and
         (ii)   The new certificate must have the relevant phrase
"REINSTATEMENT OF INSURANCE POLICY" or "REINSTATEMENT OF BOND" typed or printed
on it in capital letters, as shown.
   (g)   Forms. Certificates of insurance and other forms necessary for filing
can be obtained from the Commission.
   (h)   Contract is Required. No surety bond or certificate of insurance can
be filed with the Commission unless a direct contractual relationship exists
between the Commuter-Van Vehicle Licensee (or the Authorized Commuter-Van
Service) and the insurance or bonding company making the filing.
   (i)   Commission's Right to Refuse. The Commission can at any time refuse to
accept any surety bond or certificate of insurance if in the judgment of the
Commission it does not provide adequate protection for the public.
   (j)   Policy Coverage Restrictions. Insurance policies covering Commuter
Vans cannot have any limitations or restrictions on location or timeframes of
coverage. Coverage provided under issued policies must be for 24 hours per day,
7 days per week, regardless of vehicle use or purpose.
   (k)   Excess policies may be used to satisfy the Commission’s minimum
coverage requirements with a company authorized to do business in this State by
the Superintendent of Insurance.
   (l)   Policy Information Required. Documentation submitted to the Commission
for each vehicle covered by a policy must contain the vehicle identification
number for each such vehicle, effective and end dates of the policy, coverage
amounts, and Certificates of Liability.
      (1)   Declaration pages are required upon Commission request and must
contain the schedule of covered vehicles and the policy number.
      (2)   All documentation must be submitted electronically in a form
approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $350 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
61A-11(j), (k) & (l) compliance
 
(Amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025,
eff. 1/1/2026)
§ 61A-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   No Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not directly or indirectly
offer or give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee,
representative or member of the Commission or any other public servant who is
charged with the administration or enforcement of this Subchapter or any
traffic rule or law. All administrative hearings on this matter will be
referred to OATH.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or      Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(a)   suspension or revocation
 
   (b)   Report Request for Gift. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission and to the New York City Department of Investigation any request or
demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee, representative
or member of the Commission or any other public servant who is charged with the
administration or enforcement of this Subchapter or any traffic rule or law.
All administrative hearings on this matter will be referred to OATH.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or      Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(b)   suspension or revocation
 
   (c)   No Threat or Use of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person or
Service Animal and must not distract or attempt to distract any Service Animal.

 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 – $350 and/or Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(c)   suspension or revocation
 
   (d)   Report Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission within five calendar days
after any criminal conviction of the Licensee, individually or, if the Licensee
is a Business Entity, of any Limited Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-12(d)
 
   (e)   Cooperate with the Commission. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must:
      (1)   Truthfully answer all questions and comply with all communications,
directives, and summonses issued by the Commission or its representatives.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Produce or be responsible for instructing the Driver of Owner's
Commuter-Van Vehicle to produce any documents required to be kept in the
Commuter-Van upon the demand of the Commission or its representatives.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(e)(2)
 
      (3)   Produce any other document the Owner is required to keep no later
than five business days following a request from the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $75 - $350 and/or     Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(e)(3) suspension until compliance
 
      (4)   Aid the Commission to obtain information regarding any Commuter-Van
Driver operating a Commuter-Van owned by the Owner.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $75 - $350 and/or     Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12(e)(4) suspension until compliance
 
      (5)   Respond to any contact from the Commission within 48 hours, seven
days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-12(e)(5)
 
   (f)   No Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not
deliberately fail to perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure
is against the best interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or               Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12 (f)  suspension up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (g)   No Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not
deliberately perform or attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that
is against the best interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or               Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12 (g)  suspension up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (h)   Fraud, Misrepresentation, Theft. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not commit or
attempt to commit, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and                Appearance REQUIRED
61A-12 (h)  suspension up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (i)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Commuter-Van Vehicle
Owner must not Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-12(i)
 
   (j)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A Commuter Van Vehicle Owner must not retaliate against any Driver
for making a good faith complaint against any Owner.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first violation and a
61A-12(j)   fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second violation within five
            years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 61A-13 Comply with Laws – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Commission Rules. The following actions can result in suspension or
revocation of an Owner's Commuter-Van Service Authorization:
      (1)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees violates any provision of these Rules or any of the rules relating to
Commuter-Van Vehicles or Service in Chapter 5, Title 19 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees engages in any fraud or misrepresentation in connection with
providing any transportation service.
      (3)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons fails to
pay any penalty that has been properly imposed under these Rules.
      (4)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons is
convicted of a crime that the Commission believes has a direct bearing upon the
Owner's fitness or ability to perform the functions required of a Commuter-Van
Service Owner.
      (5)   The Owner fails to maintain the conditions of operation that apply
to Commuter-Van Vehicle Owners.
      (6)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees engages in discrimination according to the provisions of § 8-107 of
the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Workers Compensation. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must comply with
all provisions of the NYS Workers' Compensation Law and regulations with
respect to coverage of and benefits to eligible persons.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance, and
61A-13(b)   either suspension until compliance or license Appearance REQUIRED
            revocation.
 
   (c)   Disability Laws. The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must ensure that all
new Commuter-Van Vehicles comply with the applicable provisions of law
regarding accessibility to Persons with Disabilities.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
61A-13(c)
 
   (d)   Motor Vehicle Registration Laws. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must
ensure that no Commuter-Van Vehicle is used in the operation of a Commuter-Van
Service unless the Vehicle is in compliance with the registration requirements
of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and suspension of the Commuter-Van Appearance REQUIRED
61A-13(d)   license until compliance
 
   (e)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
      (1)   An Owner must pay the Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax due as described
in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision on an Owner's Vehicle as and when
required by the Commission in these Rules.
      (2)   An Owner must pay the amounts required in subdivision (g) of 35
RCNY §
61A-06, including interim payments if any.
      (3)   An Owner must also pay any additional Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax
amount for any tax year or period which the New York City Department of Finance
has notified the Commission is due and unpaid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and suspension Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-13(e)   until compliance
 
§ 61A-14 Operations – Business Premises.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-15 Operations – Management Oversight (Use of Agents).
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-16 Operations – Service Requirements (Passengers).
   (a)   No Pick-Ups Outside Authorized Area. No Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner
will permit the pick up or discharge of passengers outside of the geographical
area established in the Commuter-Van Service Owner's Authorization.
   (b)   No Pick-Ups Along Bus Routes.
      (1)   Restriction. No Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner will permit the pick up
or discharge of passengers along any Official Bus Route.
      (2)   Grandfathered Exception.
         (i)   This restriction will not apply to the pick up and discharge of
passengers along bus routes in Manhattan, south of Chambers Street, by
Commuter-Van Service Owners that had authority on July 1, 1992 from the NYS
Department of Transportation to pick up and discharge passengers along bus
routes in that area.
         (ii)   The scope of operations by the exempted Commuter-Van Service,
however, must not exceed the scope of its operations prior to July 1, 1992.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
61A-16(a), (b) hearing; $100 if found guilty following Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               a hearing.
 
   (c)   Service Must Be Pre-Arranged. No Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner will
permit transportation service unless the service is prearranged.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-16(c)   $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (d)   Multiple Person Liability. The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner is liable
for violating this 35 RCNY §
61A-16 even when the actual violation has been unilaterally committed by the
Commuter-Van Driver.
   (e)   Clean Vehicle. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must keep the Vehicle
clean inside and out.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-16(e)
 
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-17 Operations – Responsibility with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Prohibit Disability Discrimination by Drivers. A Vehicle Owner must
not allow a Driver to discriminate unlawfully against Persons with
Disabilities. Such discrimination includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Refusing to serve Persons with Disabilities,
      (2)   Refusing to load and unload the mobility aids of Persons with
Disabilities, and
      (3)   Imposing any charge in addition to the authorized fare for the
transportation of Persons with Disabilities, service animals, wheelchairs, or
other mobility aids.
   (b)   Multiple Person Liability. The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner will be
liable for violating this Rule even when the actual violation has been
unilaterally committed by the Commuter-Van Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
61A-17
 
§ 61A-18 Records – Trip Record Information. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-19 Records – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Current Phone Number for Immediate Access. A Commuter-Van Vehicle
Owner must maintain on file with the Commission a current telephone number
(connected to an answering machine or recording device), pager number,
answering service number or a number for any similar means of telephone contact
that allows the Vehicle Owner to be reached by the Commission on a 24-hour
basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-19(a)
 
   (b)   Mailing Address and E-mail Address. 
      (1)   A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must have a current E-mail Address at
all times.
      (2)   A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner must report any change of Mailing
Address or E-mail address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten
days.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-19(b)(2)
 
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 61A-20 Records – Additional Records to be Maintained.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-21 Reporting Requirements.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-22 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-23 Operations – E-ZPass.
[Reserved.]
§ 61A-24 Operations – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Advertising Must State Commission Licensed and Authorized. No one is
permitted to advertise Commuter-Van services unless the advertisement states
CONSPICUOUSLY that the Commuter-Van Vehicle is Licensed by the Commission and
includes the affiliated Commuter-Van Service Authorization number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-24(a)
 
§ 61A-25 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Inspection by NYS Department of Transportation. A Commuter-Van Vehicle
must not be operated as a Commuter-Van Vehicle unless it has been inspected by
the NYS Department of Transportation. Provisions and requirements for this
inspection can be found in the safety provisions (§ 140) of the NYS
Transportation Law or as modified by an agreement between the NYS Department of
Transportation and the Commission, as provided in NYS Transportation Law § 80
(5)(a)(1).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-25(a)
 
   (b)   Display Inspection Certificate. All Commuter-Van Vehicles must display
the inspection certificate.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-25(b)
 
§ 61A-26 Vehicle Condition – Meets Safety Standards.
   (a)   No Commuter-Van Vehicle can be used in a Commuter-Van Service unless
it meets the vehicle safety standards prescribed by rule or regulation of the
NYS Commissioner of Transportation according to § 140 of the NYS Transportation
Law.
 
            Fine: $100 - $500 and/or suspension or
            revocation of Commuter-Van License
35 RCNY §  Three or more violations within one year:      Appearance REQUIRED
61A-26(a)   License revocation (see Mandatory Penalties 35
            RCNY §
            61A-02(e))
 
   (b)   Seat Belts. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle must have seat belts that are
clearly visible, accessible, and in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-26(b)
 
   (c)   [Reserved.] Shoulder Belts Required.
   (d)   [Reserved.] Correct Defect Directives.
   (e)   [Reserved.] Daily Personal Inspection by Owner.
§ 61A-27 Vehicles – Markings and Displays.
   (a)   Required Exterior ID Markings. All Commuter-Van Vehicles must have the
following information conspicuously painted on each side of the exterior of the
Vehicle in letters at least 3 inches in height:
      (1)   The exact name and address of the Commuter-Van Service next to the
word OPERATOR;
      (2)   The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner's exact name next to the word OWNER;
and
      (3)   A Vehicle License number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-27(a)
 
      (4)   The required information must be in English. The information can
also be in another language.
   (b)   Required Interior ID Markings.
      (1)   A sign with the information listed above (in subdivision (a)) must
be placed in the interior of the Vehicle clearly visible from all Passenger
seats in the Vehicle.
      (2)   The sign must include the statement that any complaints can be
submitted to the Taxi and Limousine Commission by calling "311" or through the
Commission's website: http://nyc.gov/taxi.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-27(b)
 
      (3)   The required information must be in English. The information can
also be in another language.
   (c)   Valid Commission Decal.
      (1)   Each time a Commuter-Van Vehicle License is issued or renewed or
transferred to a new Vehicle, the Vehicle must be taken to a Commission
inspection facility to have four decals affixed to the Vehicle.
      (2)   No Commuter-Van Vehicle License is Valid unless the Vehicle has the
appropriate, undamaged decals in each of the following locations:
         (i)   The lower right corner of the front windshield
         (ii)   The center of the rear window
         (iii)   One on each of the rear-most side windows.
 
            First violation in a 1-month
35 RCNY §  period: $500
61A-27(c)   Second and subsequent violations within a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            12-month period: $1,000 and suspension of
            the Commuter-Van License until compliance
 
   (d)   Commuter Van Decal. 
      (1)   All Commuter Van vehicles must permanently affix and display the
Commuter Van Decal, whose dimensions are 21.7 inches wide by 11 inches high,
and the TLC License Number Decal, whose dimensions are 2.5 inches high:
         (i)   Driver side front door (Required). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered left to
right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the door trim
and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
         (ii)   Passenger side front door (Required). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered left to
right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the door trim
and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
      (2)   All Commuter Van vehicles may permanently affix and display on the
rear door of the vehicle an optional Commuter Van Decal, whose dimensions are
21.7 inches wide by 11 inches high, and an optional TLC License Number Decal,
whose dimensions are 2.5 inches high:
         (i)   Rear door (Optional). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered left to
right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the door trim
and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-27(d)
 
   (e)   Vehicle Cannot Be Yellow. A Commuter-Van Vehicle must not be operated
in a Commuter-Van Service if the Vehicle is painted, in whole or in part, any
shade of taxicab yellow.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-27(e)
 
   (f)   Required Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing."
The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The
sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. The
sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-27(f)(1) and (2)
 
   (g)   Optional Sticker. Commuter-Van Vehicles may display an optional
external sticker, with the following inscription: "The choices you make behind
the wheel matter." The dimensions of the sticker are 15 inches wide by 4 inches
wide. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the
Commission's website or through other appropriate means announced on the
website. If displayed, the sticker must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (h)   Required Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver
Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the
sticker are 8.0 inches wide by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Incorporated into the Commuter-Van Bill of Rights.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
61A-27(h)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (i)   Optional Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle may display an external
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are
Protected By New York State Law ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By
Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5
inches wide by 3.5 inches high. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the
instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Exterior, on a door or a side window.
   (j)   Required Decal. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle with Hearing Induction Loop
capability must display a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature
the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile
of an ear with a wide diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top
right. The symbol contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will
be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will be placed
as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
61A-27(j)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
(Amended City Record 7/23/2015, eff. 8/22/2015; amended City Record 1/28/2016,
eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 61A-28 Vehicles – Items Required to be in the Vehicle.
   (a)   Commuter-Van Vehicles must carry the following inside the Vehicle any
time the Vehicle is in operation:
      (1)   The Commuter-Van Vehicle License;
      (2)   The Driver's Commuter-Van Driver's License (this must be mounted in
a protective holder behind the Driver's seat);
      (3)   The Authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service, or a legible
photocopy; and
      (4)   The Vehicle registration and evidence of current liability
insurance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 per missing item; maximum penalty Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-28(a)   $50
 
   (b)   Commuter-Van Passengers' Bill of Rights.
      (1)   Every Vehicle Owner must post a Commuter-Van Passengers' Bill of
Rights in a form and format prescribed by the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web site
or will provide the information through other appropriate means that will be
posted on its Web site.
      (3)   The Commuter-Van Passengers' Bill of Rights must be placed in a
protective holder attached to the back of the front Passenger's seat.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-28(b)
 
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61A-29 Vehicle Equipment.
   (a)   Two-Way Radio. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner that uses a two-way radio
or other communications system must be in compliance with all regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission relating to the communication system.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-29(a)
 
   (b)   Heating and Air Conditioning. A Commuter-Van Vehicle must be equipped
with functioning heating and air conditioning equipment.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61A-29(b)
 
**** Subchapter 61B: Commuter-Van Service Owners ****
§ 61B-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining and
maintaining Authorization for a Commuter-Van Service.
   (b)   To provide penalties for violation of the requirements of maintaining
Authorization for a Commuter-Van Service.
   (c)   The Rules in this Subchapter apply, primarily, to the Commuter-Van
Service Owner. When a Rule references that another party is also responsible,
unless otherwise clearly stated, the responsibility is joint and several and
both parties may be held entirely responsible for a violation of the Rule.
§ 61B-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee or holder of an Authorization whose License or
Authorization is suspended, revoked, or expired and not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, or for the for hire vehicle, or for
the for hire service, as applicable.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Mandatory Penalties.
      (1)   The following cumulative violations will result in mandatory
revocation:
 
                                                          Penalty, after
Section     Violation              Cumulative Criteria    opportunity for
                                                          Hearing
                                   Each of a group of 30%
                                   of the total number of
35 RCNY §  Failure to maintain    Vehicles affiliated    Revocation of Service
61B-11(b)   proper insurance       with the Service       Authorization
                                   violates three or more
                                   times within 12 months
                                   Each of a group of 30%
            Failure to comply with of the total number of
35 RCNY §  any safety inspection  Vehicles affiliated    Revocation of Service
61B-26      requirement            with the Service       Authorization
                                   violates three or more
                                   times within 12 months
                                   Any Driver driving for
35 RCNY §  Operating a Vehicle    the Service commits    Revocation of Service
61B-10(a)   without a Commuter-Van three or more          Authorization
            Drivers License        violations within six
                                   months
            Drivers operating a    The number of
            vehicle without any    violations is equal to
35 RCNY §  one of the licenses    90% (rounded up) of    Revocation of Service
61B-10(c)   necessary to operate a the Service's          Authorization
            Commuter Van           Vehicles, or 5,
                                   whichever is greater
 
      (2)   A Service that has had its Authorization revoked under any of these
mandatory penalties is not permitted to apply for a new Authorization for a
period of six months after the date of revocation.
§ 61B-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Subchapter means an applicant for an original
Commuter-Van Service Authorization or its renewal.
   (b)   Authorization means the Commission's approval to operate a Commuter-
Van Service within the geographic boundaries specified by the Commission. An
Authorization is a License.
   (c)   Business Entity is a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited
liability company or corporation.
   (d)   Driver in this Subchapter refers to a Commuter-Van Vehicle Driver.
   (e)   Finding of Public Need means a determination that a Commuter-Van
Service being proposed will be required either now or in the future for the
convenience and necessity of the public.
   (f)   Limited Business Entity Persons are all Business Entity Persons except
shareholders holding less than 10% of the stock of the Business Entity.
   (g)   New York City will be abbreviated NYC or the City.
   (h)   New York State will be abbreviated NYS.
   (i)   Official Bus Route in this Subchapter means the route, including all
stops, traveled upon by a bus line that is operated by:
      (1)   The New York City Transit Authority
      (2)   The City of New York, or
      (3)   A private bus company that has been approved by local law or
Charter provision enacted in accordance with § 80-4 of the Transportation Law.
   (j)   Owner, when used alone in this Subchapter, means a Commuter-Van
Service Owner.
   (k)   Vehicle, when used alone in this Subchapter, means a Licensed
Commuter-Van Vehicle.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-04 Authorization – Requirements.
   (a)   [Reserved.] ID.
   (b)   [Reserved.] Age.
   (c)   Fingerprinting to Verify Good Moral Character.
      (1)   An Applicant for a new Service Authorization must be fingerprinted
for the purpose of securing criminal history records from the NYS Division of
Criminal Justice Services.
      (2)   An Applicant for a renewal of a Service Authorization must be
fingerprinted when a new Finding of Public Need is also required.
      (3)   Fingerprints will be taken of all of the Applicant's Limited
Business Entity Persons.
      (4)   If the Applicant intends to add or change any additional Limited
Business Entity Persons, the Applicant must apply for the Commission's approval
within five days of the change or addition, and those additional Limited
Business Entity Persons must be fingerprinted either before or during the
Commission's approval process.
      (5)   The Applicant must pay any processing fee required by the State.
   (d)   Fitness to Hold Authorization. No Commuter-Van Service Authorization
can be issued or renewed unless an Applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Commission that the Applicant is Fit to Hold a License (Authorization)
to operate a Commuter-Van Service.
   (e)   Designate Driver as Agent for Service. An Applicant must agree that
any Commuter-Van Driver who drives for Owner's Commuter-Van Service will be
considered an agent of the Service Owner for purposes of accepting service of
any and all legal process issued by any department of the City of New York.
   (f)   Forms and Filing. An application for a Commuter-Van Service
Authorization or renewal must be submitted on forms provided by the Commission,
signed by the applicant, and personally filed with the Commission.
   (g)   Certification of Compliance with ADA. An applicant for an
Authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service or its renewal must certify by
affidavit, annually, that the Commuter-Van Service is in compliance with Title
III of the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. §§ 12101
et seq.).
   (h)   Certification of Compliance with Federal Omnibus Testing Act. An
Applicant for an Authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service or for its
renewal must certify by affidavit, annually, that the Commuter-Van Service is
in compliance with all applicable provisions of section 5 of the Federal
Omnibus Transportation Testing Act of 1991 (49 U.S.C. App. § 2717), as amended,
and all regulations relating to the Act.
   (i)   A "Finding of Public Need".
      (1)   The Commission cannot issue an Authorization to operate a Commuter-
Van Service unless the NYC Commissioner of Transportation makes a Finding of
Public Need.
      (2)   Role of the Commission:
         (i)   The Commission will forward any new application for
Authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service (or a renewal application that
requires a new Finding of Public Need) to the NYC Commissioner of
Transportation.
         (ii)   The application must include the following information:
            A.   The geographic area proposed to be served by the Applicant;
            B.   The maximum number of vehicles to be operated; and
            C.   The capacity of each vehicle.
         (iii)   The Applicant has the burden of demonstrating that the
proposed service will be required now or in the future for the convenience and
necessity of the public.
      (3)   Role of the NYC Commissioner of Transportation.
         (i)   The Commissioner of Transportation may request that the
Applicant provide additional information relevant to his or her determination
but shall not require statements of public support as part of the application.
         (ii)   The Commissioner of Transportation must:
            A.   Consult with the NYS Department of Transportation,
            B.   Provide a notice of the application for publication in the
City Record
            C.   Allow for public comment for a period not to exceed 60 days
after the date of publication of the notice.
            D.   Notify the New York City Transit Authority and all City
Council members and community boards representing any portion of the geographic
area set forth in the application.
         (iii)   If a city bus line or the New York City Transit Authority
initiates a protest by timely submitting objections to the application for a
Finding of Public Need, the Commissioner of Transportation will evaluate their
objections as follows:
            A.   The adequacy of the existing transit and mass transportation
facilities to meet the transportation needs of any particular segment of the
general public for the proposed service; and
            B.   The impact that the proposed operation may have on any
existing transit or mass transportation facilities.
         (iv)   If the Commissioner of Transportation makes a Finding of Public
Need, the Finding must specify the geographic area where service is authorized
and the number of Commuter-Van Vehicles authorized to be used in providing the
service.
      (4)   Term of a Finding of Public Need.
         (i)   A Finding of Public Need will be in effect until the
Authorization granted by the Commission is revoked or such determination of the
Finding of Public Need is revoked by the Commissioner of Transportation.
         (ii)   Upon the revocation of an authorization, no authorization to
operate a commuter Van service shall be renewed unless a new determination of
public need is made by the Commissioner of Transportation.
   (j)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to their failure to surrender a previously revoked
License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person or in
writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (k)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (l)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-05 Authorization – Term of Authorization.
   (a)   New Authorizations. A new Commuter-Van Service Authorization will
remain in effect until the authorization is revoked by the Commission or by the
Commissioner of Transportation.
   (b)   TLC License Renewals. The renewal term of the TLC license is two years
from the date on which the previous license expired.
   (c)   No Temporary Authorization. The Commission will not issue a temporary
authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service.
   (d)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the license.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the license. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the license cannot be renewed.
   (e)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If an Authorization is suspended, the Licensee must file for
renewal as required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the
Authorization. Failure to complete the renewal requirements means that the
Authorization cannot be renewed.
      (2)   An Authorization that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used
until the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-06 Authorization Fees.
   (a)   Fee for Authorization. The fee for a Commuter Van Service
Authorization will be $275 annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal Authorization
must be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (d)   Authorization Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed Authorization is $25.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-07 Authorization – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Material Misrepresentation. The Commission can deny an application for
Authorization if the Applicant has made a material false statement or concealed
a material fact relating to the information required on the application.
   (b)   Conduct Prohibited by Rules. The Commission can deny an application if
the Applicant has engaged in any conduct that would be a basis for suspension
or revocation of the Authorization under the Rules in this Subchapter.
   (c)   Prior Unlicensed Activity. The Commission will deny an application for
an Authorization if the Applicant has been found guilty of operating a
Commuter-Van Service without Authorization two times within a six-month period
prior to the date of application.
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new Authorization if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
90 days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal
Authorization if the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an
application by the expiration date of the prior Authorization.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Refusal to Renew. The Commission may refuse to renew a Commuter-Van
Service Authorization for additional reasons, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has violated any provision of these Rules or any of the rules
relating to commuter van service in Chapter 5, Title 19 of the Administrative
Code.
      (2)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has engaged in any fraud or misrepresentation in connection with
providing any transportation service.
      (3)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons has
failed to pay any penalty that has been properly imposed under these Rules.
      (4)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons has
been convicted of a crime that the Commission believes has a direct bearing
upon the Applicant's fitness or ability to perform the functions required of a
Commuter-Van Service Owner, or has been convicted of any offense that under
Article 23-A of the NYS Correction Law would provide a basis for the Commission
to refuse to renew or to suspend or revoke a Commuter-Van Service
Authorization.
      (5)   The Applicant has failed to maintain the conditions of operation
that apply to Commuter-Van Service Owners.
      (6)   The Applicant or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees has engaged in discrimination according to the provisions of § 8-107
of the Administrative Code.
   (f)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License (Authorization), the Chairperson may seek additional
information from the Applicant. This request for additional information may be
an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of
communication. This additional consideration may result in the denial of the
application.
§ 61B-08 Licensing – Transfer of License.
   (a)   Not Transferrable or Assignable Without Approval. An authorization to
operate a Commuter-Van Service will not be assignable or transferable unless
otherwise provided by the Commission.
§ 61B-09 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
   (a)   If the Authorization for a Commuter-Van Service is lost, damaged, or
destroyed, the Owner must provide the Commission with a statement of what
happened and any proof that the Commission requires.
   (b)   The Commission can issue a duplicate or substitute Authorization upon
the Owner's payment of a $25 fee.
§ 61B-10 Comply with Laws – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Vehicle Must Be Licensed. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must not allow
an vehicle to be operated within the City of New York (meaning performing
passenger pick-up and drop-off wholly within New York City) if the vehicle does
not have a Valid Commuter-Van License from the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four Appearance
61B-10(a)   months                                                                             REQUIRED
 
   (b)   Vehicle Must Be Affiliated with Authorized Commuter-Van Service. A
Commuter-Van Service Owner must not operate a Commuter-Van Vehicle within the
City of New York unless it is affiliated with the Owner's Commuter-Van Service.

 
            Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four
35 RCNY §  months                                                                             Appearance
61B-10(b)   Multiple violations: See Mandatory Penalties (35 RCNY §                           REQUIRED
            61B-02(d))
 
   (c)   Driver Must Be Licensed. The Commuter-Van Service Owner is responsible
for ensuring that anyone operating a Commuter-Van Vehicle affiliated with the
Owner's Service has:
      (1)   A Valid driver's license that qualifies as a Chauffeur's License,
and
      (2)   A Valid Commuter-Van Driver's License.
      (3)   The License of a Consumer-Van Service Owner who allows a Commuter
Van Vehicle affiliated with the Owner's Service to be operated by anyone
without a valid Chauffer's License and a valid Commuter-Van Driver's License
will be summarily suspended.
 
            Fine: $500 and Suspension of Commuter-Van license until
35 RCNY §  compliance                                                Appearance
61B-10(c)   Multiple violations: See Mandatory Penalties (35 RCNY §  REQUIRED
            61B-02(d))
 
   (d)   No Person Can Operate an Unlicensed Commuter-Van Vehicle or Service.
      (1)   No person is allowed to operate or to allow anyone else to operate
his or her vehicle bearing the words "Commuter-Van service," "van service,"
"Commuter-Van," "van" or other similar designation unless:
         (i)   The vehicle is a Validly Licensed Commuter Van Vehicle
         (ii)   The Vehicle is affiliated with a Validly Authorized Commuter-
Van Service, and
         (iii)   The Vehicle is driven by a Validly Licensed Commuter-Van
Driver.
      (2)   A "License" that has expired and has not yet been renewed is not a
"Valid License" and operating with an expired License is considered "unlicensed
activity."
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 – first violation; $1,000 – subsequent violation within twenty-four Appearance
61B-10(d)   months                                                                             REQUIRED
 
   (e)   Special Procedures Relating to Unlicensed Commuter-Van Operations.
      (1)   The Commission will notify the NYS Commissioner of Motor Vehicles
upon finding a person liable for:
         (i)   Operating a vehicle without a Valid Commuter-Van Vehicle
License, or
         (ii)   Operating a vehicle that is not affiliated with an Authorized
Commuter-Van Service.
      (2)   Until notified that the violation has been corrected, the Motor
Vehicle Commissioner can:
         (i)   Suspend the vehicle's registration,
         (ii)   Deny any application for the vehicle's registration or
registration renewal,
         (iii)   Take any other action permitted under law.
      (3)   The Commission will also notify the NYS Department of Finance.
§ 61B-11 Comply with Laws – Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   Joint Responsibility. The Commuter-Van Service owner must ensure that
no Commuter-Van will be used in the Commuter-Van Service unless such vehicle is
in compliance with the insurance requirements set forth in this 35 RCNY §
61B-11.
 
            Fine: $300 and/or revocation of Commuter-Van
            license
35 RCNY §  If each one of a group of at least 30% of the
61B-11(a)   Vehicles affiliated with a Commuter-Van Service Appearance REQUIRED
            fails to maintain liability insurance three
            times within a 12 month period, the Service's
            Authorization will be revoked
 
   (b)   Surety Bond or Policy of Insurance. No Commuter-Van Vehicle can be
used in the operation of a Commuter-Van Service unless it is covered by a
surety bond or a policy of insurance approved as to form by the Commission and
issued by a solvent and responsible company authorized to do business in this
State by the Superintendent of Insurance. Each Owner of a Commuter Van must
maintain the following coverage:
      (1)   General Coverage for Commuter Vans with Seating Capacity of Less
than Eight. For the purposes of insurance or other financial security, each
Owner of a Commuter Van with a seating capacity of less than eight passengers
(not including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in
amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $50,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $100,000 minimum liability and $300,000 maximum liability for
bodily injury and death, as those terms are described and defined in section
370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law;
         (iii)   $50,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
      (2)   General Coverage for Commuter Vans with Seating Capacity of Eight
or More. For the purposes of insurance or other financial security, each Owner
of a Commuter Van with a seating capacity of eight or more passengers (not
including the Driver) must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in amounts
not less than the following:
         (i)   $50,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of section 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $500,000 minimum liability for bodily injury and death, as
those terms are described and defined in section 370(1) of the Vehicle and
Traffic Law;
         (iii)   $50,000 minimum liability for injury to or destruction of
property.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and suspension until compliance                Appearance
61B-11(b)   Multiple violations: See Mandatory Penalties (35 RCNY §  REQUIRED
            61B-02(d))
 
   (c)   Remain in Effect Until Terminated. Surety bonds and certificates of
insurance must specify that coverage will remain in effect continuously until
terminated as provided in this Subchapter.
   (d)   Conditions for Replacement of Bonds or Insurance. Surety bonds or
certificates of insurance may be replaced, and the liability of the retiring
surety or insurer will be considered terminated as of the effective date of its
replacement, provided that the replacement surety bond or certificate of
insurance meets all of the following conditions:
      (1)   The new surety bond or certificate of insurance is acceptable to
the Commission.
      (2)   The Commuter-Van Service Owner or an authorized employee of the van
service submits, in duplicate, a letter authorizing the replacement surety bond
or certificate of insurance and verifying its effective date.
      (3)   The effective date must coincide with the effective date specified
in the letter of authorization, and that date may not be more than 30 days
before the date the Commission receives the letter of authorization and
replacement certificate.
   (e)   Provision for Continuing Liability. Every surety bond or certificate
of insurance must contain a provision for a continuing liability even after a
claim has been successfully filed and recovered against the bond or insurance.
   (f)   Notice of Cancellation to the Commission.
      (1)   Every surety bond or certificate of insurance must include a
provision that cancellation will not be effective until at least 30 days after
the Commission has been properly notified in writing of the party's intention
to cancel.
      (2)   Proper notification must be given on or in the relevant Form K –
Uniform Notice of Cancellation of Motor Carrier Insurance Policies or Form L –
Uniform Notice of Cancellation of Motion Carrier Surety Bonds. Copies of these
forms are available at Commission offices.
      (3)   If a cancelled insurance policy or bond is reinstated:
         (i)   A new certificate, in the form required by subdivision (d) of
this section, must be filed with the Commission, and
         (ii)   The new certificate must have the relevant phrase
"REINSTATEMENT OF INSURANCE POLICY" or "REINSTATEMENT OF BOND" typed or printed
on it in capital letters, as shown.
   (g)   Forms. Certificates of insurance and other forms necessary for filing
can be obtained from the Commission.
   (h)   Contract is Required. No surety bond or certificate of insurance can
be filed with the Commission unless a direct contractual relationship exists
between the Authorized Commuter-Van Service (or the Commuter-Van Vehicle
Licensee) and the insurance or bonding company making the filing.
   (i)   Commission's Right to Refuse. The Commission can at any time refuse to
accept any surety bond or certificate of insurance if in the judgment of the
Commission it does not provide adequate protection for the public.
(Amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 61B-12 Comply with Laws – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   No Bribery. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must not directly or
indirectly offer or give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee,
representative or member of the Commission or any public servant who is charged
with the administration or enforcement of this Subchapter or any traffic rule
or law. All administrative hearings on this matter will be referred to OATH.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(a)
 
   (b)   Report Request for Gift. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must immediately
report to the Commission and to the New York City Department of Investigation
any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee,
representative or member of the Commission or any public servant who is charged
with the administration or enforcement of this Subchapter or any traffic rule
or law. All administrative hearings on this matter will be referred to OATH.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(b)
 
   (c)   No Threat or Use of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of an Authorized Commuter-Van Service Owner, or any act in
connection with those duties, an Owner must not use or attempt to use any
physical force against a person or Service Animal and must not distract or
attempt to distract any Service Animal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 – $350 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(c)   revocation
 
   (d)   Report Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Commuter-Van Service Owner must notify the Commission within five
calendar days after any criminal conviction of the Licensee, individually or,
if the Owner is a Business Entity, of any Limited Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-12(d)
 
   (e)   Cooperate with TLC. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must:
      (1)   Truthfully answer all questions and comply with all communications,
directives, and summonses issued by the Commission or its representatives;
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Produce or be responsible for instructing Drivers working in
association with Owner's Commuter-Van Service to produce any documents required
to be kept in the Commuter-Van Vehicle upon the demand of the Commission or its
representatives;
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $150 Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(e)(2)
 
      (3)   Produce any other document the Owner is required to keep no later
than five business days following a request from the Commission;
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $75 - $350 and/or suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(e)(3) compliance
 
      (4)   Aid the Commission to obtain information regarding any Commuter-Van
Driver or Commuter-Van Vehicle affiliated with the Owner's Commuter-Van
Service.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $75 - $350 and/or suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12(e)(4) compliance
 
      (5)   Respond to any contact from the Commission within 48 hours, seven
days a week.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-12(e)(5)
 
   (f)   No Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not
deliberately fail to perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure
is against the best interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or               Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12 (f)  suspension up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (g)   No Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner, a Licensee must not
deliberately perform or attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that
is against the best interests of the public.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or               Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12 (g)  suspension up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (h)   Fraud, Misrepresentation, Theft. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Commuter-Van Service Owner, a Licensee must not commit or
attempt to commit, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and                Appearance REQUIRED
61B-12 (h)  suspension up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (i)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Commuter-Van Service
Owner must not Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-12(i)
 
   (j)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A Commuter Van Service Owner must not retaliate against any Driver
for making a good faith complaint against any Owner.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  for losses for the first violation and a
61B-12(j)   fine of $10,000 plus restitution to the     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            driver for the second violation within five
            years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; amended City Record 5/10/2023,
eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 61B-13 Comply with Laws – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Commission Rules. The following actions can result in suspension or
revocation of an Owner's Commuter-Van Service Authorization:
      (1)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees violates any provision of these Rules or any of the rules relating to
Commuter-Van Service in Chapter 5, Title 19 of the Administrative Code.
      (2)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees engages in any fraud or misrepresentation in connection with
providing any transportation service.
      (3)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons fails to
pay any penalty that has been properly imposed under these Rules.
      (4)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons is
convicted of a crime that the Commission believes has a direct bearing upon the
Owner's fitness or ability to perform the functions required of a Commuter-Van
Service Owner.
      (5)   The Owner fails to maintain the conditions of operation that apply
to Commuter-Van Service Owners.
      (6)   The Owner or any of its Limited Business Entity Persons or
employees engages in discrimination according to the provisions of § 8-107 of
the Administrative Code.
   (b)   Workers Compensation. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must comply with
all provisions of the NYS Workers' Compensation Laws and regulations with
respect to coverage of and benefits to eligible persons.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 for each day of non-compliance, and
61B-13(b)   either suspension until compliance or license Appearance REQUIRED
            revocation.
 
   (c)   Disability Laws. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must ensure that any new
Commuter-Van Vehicle purchased or leased by the Commuter-Van Service complies
with all applicable provisions of law regarding accessibility to Persons with
Disabilities.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
61B-13(c)
 
   (d)   Motor Vehicle Registration Laws. A Commuter-Van Service Owner must
ensure that no Commuter-Van is used in the operation of a Commuter-Van Service
unless the Vehicle is in compliance with the registration requirements of the
NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and suspension of the Commuter-Van Appearance REQUIRED
61B-13(d)   license until compliance
 
§ 61B-14 Operations – Business Premises.
[Reserved.]
§ 61B-15 Operations – Management Oversight (Use of Agents).
[Reserved.]
§ 61B-16 Operations – Service Requirements (Passengers).
   (a)   No Pick-Ups Outside Authorized Area. No Commuter-Van Service Owner
will permit the pick up or discharge of passengers outside of the geographical
area established in the Owner's Authorization.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty
61B-16(a)   before a hearing; $100 if found guilty Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            following a hearing.
 
   (b)   No Pick-Ups Along Bus Routes.
      (1)   Restriction. No Commuter-Van Service Owner will permit the pick up
or discharge of passengers along any Official Bus Route.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty
61B-16(b)(1) before a hearing; $100 if found guilty Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             following a hearing.
 
      (2)   Grandfathered Exception.
         (i)   This restriction will not apply to the pick up and discharge of
passengers along bus routes in Manhattan, south of Chambers Street, by
Commuter-Van Service Owners that had authority on July 1, 1992 from the NYS
Department of Transportation to pick up and discharge passengers along bus
routes in that area
         (ii)   The scope of operations by the exempted Commuter-Van Service,
however, must not exceed the scope of its operations prior to July 1, 1992.
   (c)   Service Must Be Pre-Arranged. No Commuter-Van Service Owner will
permit transportation service unless the service is prearranged and the
prearrangement is shown on the Passenger Manifest.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty
61B-16(c)   before a hearing; $100 if found guilty Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            following a hearing.
 
   (d)   Multiple Person Liability. The Commuter-Van Service Owner is liable
for violating this Rule even when the actual violation has been unilaterally
committed by the Commuter-Van Driver.
§ 61B-17 Operations – Responsibility with Respect to Drivers.
   (a)   Prohibit Disability Discrimination by Drivers. A Commuter-Van Service
Owner must not allow a Driver to discriminate unlawfully against Persons with
Disabilities. Such discrimination includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Refusing to serve Persons with Disabilities,
      (2)   Refusing to load and unload the mobility aids of Persons with
Disabilities, and
      (3)   Imposing any charge in addition to the authorized fare for the
transportation of Persons with Disabilities, service animals, wheelchairs, or
other mobility aids.
   (b)   Multiple Person Liability. The Commuter-Van Service Owner will be
liable for violating this Rule even when the actual violation has been
unilaterally committed by the Commuter-Van Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
61B-17
 
§ 61B-18 Records – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Commuter-Van Service. The Commuter-Van Service Owner is responsible
for ensuring that the following records are kept:
      (1)   The number of passengers each Commuter-Van Vehicle affiliated with
the Commuter-Van Service picks up each day.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-18(a)(1)
 
      (2)   The records required by this paragraph must be kept for a period of
one year and will be subject to inspection by authorized officers or employees
of the Commission during regular business hours.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-18(a)(2)
 
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-19 Records – Current Contact Information.
   (a)   Current Phone Number for Immediate Access. A Commuter-Van Service
Owner must maintain on file with the Commission a current telephone number
(connected to an answering machine or recording device), pager number,
answering service number or a number for any similar means of telephone contact
that allows the Vehicle Owner to be reached by the Commission on a 24-hour
basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-19(a)
 
   (b)   Mailing and Email Address.
      (1)   A Commuter-Van Service Owner must have a working Email Address at
all times.
      (2)   A Commuter-Van Service Owner must report any change of Mailing
Address or Email Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten
days.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-19(b)(1)-(2)
 
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Commuter-Van Service Owner.
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Commuter-Van Service Owner.
§ 61B-20 Records – Additional Records to be Maintained.
 The Commuter-Van Service Owner is responsible for keeping the following
records:
   (a)   A list of all Vehicles currently operating under the Service Owner's
Authorization, and information about each vehicle including, but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   The Vehicle Owner's name, mailing address, and home telephone
number,
      (2)   The Vehicle's registration number,
      (3)   The Vehicle's Commuter-Van License number,
      (4)   The Department of Motor Vehicles license plate number of the
Vehicle,
      (5)   The name of the Vehicle's insurance carrier and the policy number,
and
      (6)   The dates of inspection of the Vehicle and the outcome of each
inspection.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-20(a)
 
   (b)   The records required by this paragraph must be kept for a period of
one year and will be subject to inspection by authorized officers or employees
of the Commission during regular business hours.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-20(b)
 
§ 61B-21 Reporting Requirements.
[Reserved.]
§ 61B-22 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
[Reserved.]
§ 61B-23 Operations – E-ZPass.
[Reserved.]
§ 61B-24 Operations – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Advertising to State TLC Licensed/Authorized. No one is permitted to
advertise Commuter-Van services unless the advertisement states CONSPICUOUSLY
that the Commuter-Van Vehicle is Licensed by the Commission and includes the
affiliated Commuter-Van Service Authorization number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-24(a)
 
§ 61B-25 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Inspection by NYS Department of Transportation. The Commuter-Van
Service Owner will be responsible for compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   A Commuter-Van Vehicle must not be operated as a Commuter-Van
Vehicle unless it has been inspected by the NYS Department of Transportation.
      (2)   Provisions and requirements for this inspection can be found in the
safety provisions (§ 140) of the NYS Transportation Law or as modified by an
agreement between the NYS Department of Transportation and the Commission, as
provided in NYS Transportation Law § 80(5)(a)(1).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-25(a)
 
   (b)   All Commuter-Van Vehicles must display the inspection certificate.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-25(b)
 
§ 61B-26 Vehicle Condition – Meets Safety Standards.
   (a)   No Commuter-Van Vehicle can be used in a Commuter-Van Service unless
it meets the vehicle safety standards prescribed by rule or regulation of the
NYS Commissioner of Transportation according to § 140 of the NYS Transportation
Law.
 
            Fine: $100 - $500 and/or suspension or
35 RCNY §  revocation of Commuter-Van license
61B-26(a)   Multiple violations: See Mandatory Penalties Appearance REQUIRED
            (35 RCNY §
            61B-02(d))
 
§ 61B-27 Vehicles – Markings and Displays.
   (a)   Required Exterior ID Markings. All Commuter-Van Vehicles must have the
following information conspicuously painted on each side of the exterior of the
vehicle in letters at least 3 inches in height:
      (1)   The exact name and address of the Commuter-Van Service next to the
word OPERATOR;
      (2)   The Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner's exact name next to the word OWNER;
and
      (3)   A Vehicle License number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-27(a)
 
   (b)   Required Interior ID Markings.
      (1)   A sign with the information listed above (in subdivision (a)) must
be placed in the interior of the Vehicle clearly visible from all Passenger
seats in the Vehicle.
      (2)   The sign must include the statement that any complaints can be
submitted to the Taxi and Limousine Commission by calling "311" or through the
Commission's website, http://nyc.gov/taxi.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-27(b)
 
   (c)   Valid TLC Decal.
      (1)   Each time a Commuter-Van Vehicle License is issued or renewed or
transferred to a new Vehicle, the Vehicle must be taken to a Commission
inspection facility to have four decals affixed to the Vehicle.
      (2)   No Commuter-Van Vehicle License is Valid unless the Vehicle has the
appropriate, undamaged decals in each of the following locations:
         (i)   The lower right corner of the front windshield
         (ii)   The center of the rear window
         (iii)   One on each of the rear-most side windows.
 
            First violation in a 12-month
            period: $500
            Second and subsequent violations within a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
35 RCNY §  12-month period: $1,000 and suspension of
61B-27(c)   the Commuter-Van License until compliance
            Third violation within a 12-month period:
            revocation of Commuter-Van Service        Appearance REQUIRED
            Authorization
   (d)   Commuter Van Decal. 
      (1)   All Commuter Van vehicles must permanently affix and display the
Commuter Van Decal, whose dimensions are 21.7 inches wide by 11 inches high,
and the TLC License Number Decal, whose dimensions are 2.5 inches high:
         (i)   Driver side front door (Required). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered left to
right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the door trim
and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
         (ii)   Passenger side front door (Required). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered left to
right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the door trim
and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
      (2)   All Commuter Van vehicles may permanently affix and display on the
rear door of the vehicle an optional Commuter Van Decal, whose dimensions are
21.7 inches wide by 11 inches high, and an optional TLC License Number Decal,
whose dimensions are 2.5 inches high:
         (i)   Rear door (Optional). 
            A.   Commuter Van Decal. The decal must be placed centered from
left to right and located in the upper half of the flat surface between the
door trim and door handle and parallel to the door trim.
            B.   License Number Decal. The decal must be placed centered left
to right and horizontally below the Commuter Van Decal.
 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-27(d)
 
   (e)   Vehicle Cannot Be Yellow. A Commuter-Van Vehicle must not be operated
in a Commuter-Van Service if the Vehicle is painted, in whole or in part, any
shade of taxicab yellow.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-27(e)
 
   (f)   Required Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Turning? People are Crossing."
The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5 inches wide by 2.5 inches high. The
sticker must be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's
website or through other appropriate means announced on the website. The
sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the inside of the front windshield, in the center and adjacent
to the top of the windshield directly behind the rearview mirror.
      (2)   In such a manner not to obstruct the driver's view.
 
35 RCNY §           Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-27(f)(1) and (2)
 
   (g)   Optional Sticker. Commuter-Van Vehicles may display an optional
external sticker, with the following inscription: "The choices you make behind
the wheel matter." The dimensions of the sticker are 15 inches wide by 4 inches
wide. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the instructions on the
Commission's website or through other appropriate means announced on the
website. If displayed, the sticker must be placed on the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On the rear bumper of the vehicle.
   (h)   Required Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle must display an internal
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver
Is Punishable By Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the
sticker are 8.0 inches wide by 2.0 inches high. The sticker must be obtained
pursuant to the instructions on the Commission's website or through other
appropriate means announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the
Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Incorporated into the Commuter-Van Bill of Rights.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
61B-27(h)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
   (i)   Optional Sticker. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle may display an external
safety sticker, with the following inscription: "Taxi and Limousine Drivers Are
Protected By New York State Law ATTENTION: Assaulting A Driver Is Punishable By
Up to Twenty-Five Years in Prison." The dimensions of the sticker are 3.5
inches wide by 3.5 inches high. The sticker may be obtained pursuant to the
instructions on the Commission's website or through other appropriate means
announced on the website. The sticker must be placed in the Vehicle as follows:
      (1)   Exterior, on a door or a side window.
   (j)   Required Decal. Each Commuter-Van Vehicle with Hearing Induction Loop
capability must display a Hearing Induction Loop Decal. The decal will feature
the International Symbol of Access for Hearing Loss, described as the profile
of an ear with a wide diagonal line running from the bottom left to the top
right. The symbol contrast shall be light on dark or dark on light. A "T" will
be placed in the lower right-hand corner of the decal. The decal will be placed
as follows:
      (1)   As directed by the Chairperson.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a
61B-27(j)(1) hearing, $75 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
             hearing
 
(Amended City Record 7/23/2015, eff. 8/22/2015; amended City Record 1/28/2016,
eff. 2/27/2016)
§ 61B-28 Vehicles – Items Required to be in the Vehicle.
   (a)   Commuter-Van Vehicles must carry the following inside the Vehicle any
time the Vehicle is in operation:
      (1)   The Commuter-Van Vehicle License;
      (2)   The Driver's Commuter-Van Driver's License;
      (3)   The Authorization to operate a Commuter-Van Service, or legible
photocopy; and
      (4)   The Vehicle registration and evidence of current liability
insurance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 per missing item; maximum penalty Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-28(a)   $50
 
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 61B-29 Vehicle Equipment.
   (a)   Two-Way Radio. A Commuter-Van Vehicle Owner that uses a two-way radio
or other communications system must be in compliance with all regulations of
the Federal Communications Commission relating to the communication system.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
61B-29(a)
 
Chapter 62: Taxicab Brokers
§ 62-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish procedures for the licensing and supervision of an
individual or Business Entity acting as a Taxicab Broker.
   (b)   To establish the qualifications, requirements, prohibitions, and
procedures for getting and maintaining a Taxicab Broker's License.
   (c)   To establish operating rules to protect the customers and the public.
   (d)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these Rules.
§ 62-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated service or business by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License from the
Commission for the service or business.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-528 of the Administrative Code and can subject the violator to padlocking
and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 62-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Administrator means the duly appointed administrator, executor,
executrix or personal representative of an estate.
   (b)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal License as a Taxicab Broker
   (c)   Broker or Taxicab Broker is an individual or Business Entity licensed
by the Commission to act as an agent for another person or Business Entity in
negotiating any of the following:
      (1)   The transfer of any interest in a Medallion.
      (2)   A loan to be secured by a Medallion or a Taxicab, including any
refinancing, extension or modification of any such loan.
   (d)   Brokerage is the term for the business of being a Broker.
   (e)   De-licensed means an individual or Business Entity whose License is
suspended or revoked.
   (f)   Exclusive Listing means that the Broker has been given the right to be
the only Broker for a particular transaction. Usually the right will be limited
to a specific period of time.
   (g)   License in this Chapter means a License to be a Taxicab Broker.
   (h)   Related Party or Parties means a spouse, domestic partner, child,
grandchild, parent, sibling, or grandparent; a parent, child or sibling of a
spouse or domestic partner; and a spouse, or domestic partner of a parent,
child or sibling of any natural person who is a Broker, or, if a Broker is a
Business Entity, of any natural person who is a partner, member, shareholder
and/or officer of a Broker.
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-04 Licensing – General Information Required.
   (a)   Identification. An Applicant for an original License must provide the
following:
      (1)   A Valid government-issued photo ID
      (2)   A Valid Social Security number
   (b)   Proof of Age. An individual Applicant and each Business Entity Person
of an Applicant must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (c)   Fit to Hold a License. An individual Applicant and each Business
Entity Person of an Applicant must demonstrate that they are Fit To Hold a
License. Fit to Hold a License will be determined in part through
fingerprinting and background investigations, as follows:
      (1)   Fingerprinting Applicants. An individual and all Business Entity
Persons applying for a Broker's license must be fingerprinted.
      (2)   Fingerprinting New Business Entity Persons. Fingerprinting is also
required when a Business Entity Licensee adds new Business Entity Persons. A
Business Entity Licensee must notify the Commission of any new Business Entity
Persons within five working days of their addition. The Commission can permit
continued use of the Broker's License during completion of the background
investigation.
      (3)   Fingerprinting Financiers. An individual or the Business Entity
Person who provides funds for Brokers must be fingerprinted unless the provider
is a licensed bank or loan company.
      (4)   Waiver of Fingerprinting. The Commission can waive fingerprinting
requirements at its discretion.
   (d)   Proficiency in the English Language. An individual Applicant and at
least one Business Entity Person of a Business Entity Applicant must be able to
understand, speak, read and write the English language.
   (e)   Experience. An individual Applicant and at least one Business Entity
Person of a Business Entity Applicant must have at least one of the following
types of experience:
      (1)   Active participation in the Taxicab Brokerage business under the
supervision of a licensed Taxicab Broker for not less than one (1) year
      (2)   Equivalent experience in the general Taxicab business for a period
of at least two (2) years The Applicant must provide a sworn affidavit
regarding the required experience. The Commission may allow or require the
Applicant to provide other proof of the required experience, or waive the
requirement entirely.
   (f)   Waivers for Attorneys. An attorney who is a member in good standing of
the Bar of the State of New York, does not need to submit proof as otherwise
required in 35 RCNY §
62-04.
   (g)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (h)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
         (i)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's
current Mailing Address and Email Address.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 62-05 Licensing – Specific Information Required.
   (a)   Location of Business Premises. The Applicant must provide the physical
address of the location where the Applicant will conduct business.
   (b)   Prior Business or Occupation of Applicant. The Applicant must provide
information on the prior business or occupation of the individual Applicant or,
if a Business Entity, information on the Applicant's Business Entity Persons
during the two years immediately before the date of the application. The
information must specify the place or places of the business or occupation and
the name or names of employers.
   (c)   Potential Conflicts of Interest. 
      (1)   The Applicant must disclose all information about Applicant's
interests if the Applicant or any principal of the Applicant or any Related
Party of Applicant also:
         (i)   Acts as a lender, insurance broker, or automobile dealer;
         (ii)   Has a financial interest in a lender, insurance broker, or
automobile dealership; or
         (iii)   Has a financial interest in any business primarily serving
applicants or holders of TLC-issued taxicab licenses or offering products or
services targeted to applicants or holders of TLC-issued taxicab licenses or
which specifically advertises to applicants or holders of TLC-issued taxicab
licenses.
      (2)   Such disclosure must be made at the time of submission of an
Application for a new or renewal Broker license in the form and manner
prescribed by the Commission.
      (3)   The disclosure on file with the Commission must be updated within
30 days of any material change in the terms of the disclosure.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,500 - $10,000 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
62-05(c)(3) revocation
 
      (4)   The TLC may post such disclosures on its web site or otherwise make
them publicly available.
      (5)   The Applicant must disclose the names of its employees at the time
of application.
   (d)   Additional Information as Required by the Commission. The Applicant
must provide any additional information the Commission may require to determine
if the Applicant is qualified to assume the duties and obligations of a Taxicab
Broker.
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-06 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Annual Fee. The fee for a Broker's License will be five hundred
dollars ($500) annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (d)   License Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed License is $25.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 62-07 Licensing – Bond Required.
   (a)   Amount of Bond. An Applicant for a Broker's License or a license
renewal must deposit with the Commission a bond in the sum of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000) payable to the City of New York. The bond must be furnished
by one or more sureties approved by the Commission.
   (b)   Bond Guarantees. The bond must guarantee that the Applicant or
Licensee will comply with the provisions of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York, observe all applicable rules or regulations of the Commission, pay
all fines imposed by the Commission, and pay all judgments or settlements
arising from any action connected in any way with the Broker's License.
   (c)   Fines and Judgments. The Broker is immediately liable for any fine or
judgment when the amount becomes due, including in case of an appeal, when the
final determination is issued.
§ 62-08 Licensing – Rules for Business Entity Applicants.
   (a)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, its application must
include a certificate from the clerk of the county where the principal place of
business is located.
   (b)   Corporations.
      (1)   The Commission will not accept any corporate or trade name similar
to a name already in use by another Taxicab Broker.
      (2)   A corporation must file with its license application the following:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of its officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
§ 62-09 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   Term of License. Taxicab Broker's Licenses will be issued as of
January 1st and will expire on the next December 31st unless suspended or
revoked before then by the Commission.
   (b)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (c)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (b) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 62-10 Licensing – Cause for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Meet Requirements. If the Commission determines that the
Applicant has failed to meet the requirements for a Taxicab Broker's license,
the Commission will notify the Applicant in writing the reason for the denial
within a reasonable period of time.
   (b)   Material Falsifications. The Commission will deny a license
application or revoke or suspend a license for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The Applicant or Broker provided materially false information in an
original or renewal application for a license.
      (2)   The Applicant or Broker failed to notify the Commission of a
material change in the information contained in the application.
      (3)   The Applicant or Broker attempted to conceal the identity of a
party who has an interest, direct or indirect, in his or her business as a
Broker.
      (4)   The Applicant failed to disclose any information about Applicant's
interest, or that of any principal of the Applicant, or any Related Party of
Applicant, in any transaction involving a Medallion, a transfer of a Medallion,
or a financing or refinancing of a Medallion in which the Applicant or any
Related Party has a financial interest.
   (c)   No Longer Meets Requirements. Whenever the Commission determines that
a licensed Broker no longer meets the requirements to hold a Broker's License,
the Commission will deny the renewal application or suspend or revoke the
License in the manner provided in Chapter 68 of these Rules.
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
by the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License (Authorization), the Chairperson may seek additional
information from the Applicant. This request for additional information may be
an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of
communication. This additional consideration may result in the denial of the
application. Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame
requested, or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a
denial of the application.
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-11 Provisions in the Event of Licensee's Death.
   (a)   When an individual Broker dies, the Administrator of his or her estate
may complete any unfinished Brokerage business.
   (b)   The Administrator must be authorized for this purpose under the
provisions of § 2108 of the Surrogate's Court Procedure Act.
   (c)   The Administrator's authority cannot extend beyond 120 days from the
date of the Broker's death unless the Commission extends this time period for
good cause.
§ 62-12 Requirements & Prohibitions – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Must Have Valid License. An individual or Business Entity must possess
a valid Taxicab Broker's License in order to act as a Taxicab Broker or hold
himself or herself out as a Taxicab Broker.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,500; after the third violation Appearance REQUIRED
62-12(a)    occurring within two years, $10,000
 
   (b)   Must Display License. A Broker must conspicuously and continuously
display a copy of his or her Broker's License in every place of business
maintained by the Broker.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-12(b)
 
   (c)   Must Not Display Invalid License. A Broker must not display a Taxicab
Broker's License that is expired, suspended, or revoked and must surrender such
a license immediately to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 Appearance REQUIRED
62-12(c)
 
   (d)   Must Renew Before Expiration. A Broker must submit an application for
renewal of the License no later than the expiration date of the License unless
the Commission grants an extension.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-12(d)
 
   (e)   Must Not Employ Certain De-Licensed Persons. A Broker must not employ
or use the services of any individual whose License as a Taxicab Broker has
been revoked or is suspended or who was the chief executive officer of a
partnership or corporation whose License has been revoked or is suspended
without the prior written consent of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-12(e)
 
   (f)   Must Not Act on Behalf of De-Licensed Broker. A Broker must not act on
behalf of any Broker whose License has been suspended or revoked without the
prior written consent of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-12(f)
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-13 Requirements & Prohibitions – Broker as Fiduciary Agent of Owner.
   (a)   Owner Authorization Required.
      (1)   A Broker must not offer a Taxicab for transfer unless the Broker is
authorized to do so by the owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,500 - $10,000 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
62-13(a)(1) revocation
 
      (2)   A Broker must not operate or cause to be operated any Medallion
delivered to the Broker without the owner's written consent.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,500 - $10,000 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
62-13(a)(2) revocation
 
   (b)   Withdrawal of Authorization. An owner can withdraw his or her
authorization by giving written notice to the Broker except where an Exclusive
Listing has been given for a fixed period.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-13(b)
 
   (c)   Storage with Commission. A Broker holding a Medallion and Rate Card
for purposes of sale must deliver them to the Commission for storage within 48
hours of their receipt, not including holidays or weekends.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-13(c)
 
   (d)   Broker Compensation. A Broker must not accept any commission, rebate,
or profit on expenditures that the Broker makes for the owner unless the Broker
has disclosed to the owner that the Broker expects to profit in an estimated
amount and the owner provides written consent. The Broker must retain the
written consent for three years.
 
            Fine: $250 - $2,000 and restitution may be
35 RCNY §  ordered to the owner if the Broker has not      Appearance REQUIRED
62-13(d)    disclosed the compensation or the owner has not
            consented
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-14 Requirements & Prohibitions – Intentional Interference with Contract.
A Broker must not encourage any party to break a contract for the transfer of a
Taxicab Medallion in order to substitute a new contract with another owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $750 Appearance REQUIRED
62-14
 
§ 62-15 Requirements & Prohibitions – Self-Dealing.
   (a)   A Broker must not directly or indirectly buy or otherwise acquire for
himself or herself, nor may a Related Party acquire any interest in a Medallion
listed with the Broker without first disclosing that fact in writing to the
owner and obtaining the owner's written consent to such transaction, in the
form and manner prescribed by the Commission. Where the Broker has an interest
in such purchase or acquisition, the Broker may not charge a fee for his or her
services.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and suspension for 30 days; Appearance REQUIRED
62-15(a)    restitution may be ordered
 
   (b)   A Broker must not sell a Medallion in which he or she or a Related
Party owns an interest without first disclosing that interest in writing to the
purchaser and obtaining the purchaser's written consent to such transaction, in
the form and manner prescribed by the Commission. Where the Broker has an
interest in such sale, the Broker may not charge a fee for his or her services
unless the necessary disclosures have been made to the purchasing and selling
parties as required by these rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and suspension for 30 days; Appearance REQUIRED
62-15(b)    restitution may be ordered.
 
   (c)   The Broker must disclose any financial interests in writing to the
purchaser and seller in any transfer of an interest in a Medallion or any other
transaction facilitated by the Broker, including but not limited to financing
or refinancing, where the Broker or any Related Party acts as a lender,
insurance broker, or automobile dealer or has a financial interest in the
lender, insurance brokerage firm, or automobile dealership or any other
business entity providing services in relation to such transaction. The Broker
must obtain the written consent of such purchaser and seller to any such
conflict prior to offering any such products or services in the form and manner
prescribed by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and suspension for 30 days; Appearance REQUIRED
62-15(c)    restitution may be ordered.
 
   (d)   If a Broker has failed to disclose any interest held by the Broker or
any Related Party in a transaction as required by this section or has failed to
obtain the written consent of the other party or parties to such transaction,
the Broker may be ordered to pay restitution to the other party for any fees
charged or tangible or intangible benefit received by the Broker.
   (e)   No Broker may represent any party in any transaction in which the
Broker or a Related Party has a conflict if the Broker has not filed the
disclosure of such conflict with the Commission as required by 35 RCNY §
62-05.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and suspension for 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
62-15(e)    revocation; restitution may be ordered.
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-16 Business Procedures – Mailing and Email Address.
   (a)   Required Mailing Address. A Broker must provide to the Commission the
street address of his or her primary business location whether or not this is
the Mailing Address.
   (b)   Additional Mailing Address. A Broker may also designate a post office
box number as a Mailing Address.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $50 - $500 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-16(a)-(b)
 
   (c)   Mailing and Email Address.
      (1)   A Broker must have a working Email Address at all times.
      (2)   A Broker must report any change of Mailing Address or Email Address
to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-16(c)(1)-(2)
 
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Broker.
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Broker.
§ 62-17 Business Procedures – Exclusive Agreements.
   (a)   Specific Disclosure. The Broker must include the following explanation
in type size of not less than six point in all agreements that provide for an
Exclusive Listing of a Taxicab Medallion:
   An "Exclusive Right to Sell" listing with a Broker is one where the owner
has surrendered his or her own right to sell. This means that if you, the
Taxicab Medallion owner, find a buyer for your Taxicab, or if another Broker
finds a buyer, you must nonetheless pay the agreed commission to the Broker who
has the Exclusive Right to Sell.
   This explanation must be signed or initialed by the owner and attached to
the listing, printed in boldface type on the listing, or printed on the reverse
side of the listing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $500 Appearance REQUIRED
62-17(a)
 
   (b)   No Automatic Continuation. A Broker must not be a party to an
Exclusive Listing contract that contains an automatic continuation of the
period for the listing beyond the end date specified in the contract.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $750 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-17(b)
 
§ 62-18 Business Procedures – Net Listings.
Net Listings. A Broker must not enter into a net listing contract for the
transfer of a Medallion or any interest in it unless the contract is part of a
bulk transfer of 10 or more Medallions owned by a fleet or minifleet and is
completed within six months of the listing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-18
 
§ 62-19 Business Procedures – Documents, Transactions, and Closing Procedures.
   (a)   Interested Parties.
      (1)   A Broker must not request, accept or permit a party to provide a
Power of Attorney or any other legal document that has not been completed and
signed.
      (2)   If a Broker requests a party to sign a document and return it to
the Broker, the Broker must give the party a duplicate copy for the party's own
records. If any party attends a closing and is presented with a document for
signature, the Broker must furnish that party with a copy of the signed
document at that closing.
      (3)   All other documents prepared by the Broker for an interested party
must be delivered to that party within 10 business days after the completion of
a closing or other transaction unless otherwise provided in these Rules.
      (4)   The Broker must request and retain written acknowledgement that the
party received the papers. The Broker must be able to provide proof of
compliance with this paragraph upon request of any party or the TLC.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $400 - $2,000 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(a)(1) - (4)
 
      (5)   A Broker must give written notice to all sellers and buyers
involved in a Medallion transfer of their right to be represented by an
attorney or an accountant of their own choosing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(a)(5)
 
   (b)   Principals.
      (1)   A Broker who arranges a loan for his or her principal must give
that principal a copy of the lender's commitment and of all other documents
provided by the lender to the Broker. The Broker must be able to provide proof
of compliance with this paragraph upon the request of any party or the TLC. The
Broker must also be able to provide proof of compliance with the requirements
of 35 RCNY §
62-15(c), if applicable.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 - $2,000 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(b)(1)
 
      (2)   Within 10 business days after the completion of a closing
(including the financial closing), a Broker must give his or her principal(s)
and the Commission a written closing statement including the following:
         (i)   Names and addresses of seller(s) and purchaser(s)
         (ii)   Medallion(s) being sold
         (iii)   Sales price
         (iv)   Vehicle cost (if any)
         (v)   Amount of personal funds furnished by purchaser
         (vi)   Names and addresses of lenders together with amount(s) of loan
(s)
         (vii)   Broker's commission
         (viii)   List of all disbursements or payments made on behalf of the
principal(s) including an explanation of the purpose for the individual
payments.
 
35 RCNY §            Fine: $500 - $2,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(b)(2)(i)-(viii)
 
      (3)   Within 10 business days after completion of the financial closing,
a Broker must forward all monies due to his or her principal(s).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,500 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(b)(3)
 
   (c)   Brokerage Agreements. 
      (1)   A Broker must execute with each client of such Broker a written
agreement, signed by the Broker and the client, which specifies each
transaction or service to be performed by such Broker for such client.
      (2)   A copy of each fully executed agreement must be provided to the
Broker's clients upon execution of the agreement and upon the client's request.
      (3)   Brokerage agreements must be written in plain language.
      (4)   Terms. Each agreement must provide:
         (i)   All parties represented by the Broker.
            (A)   If the parties represented by a Broker change after the
execution of an agreement, the agreement must be amended to reflect this
change.
            (B)   If the Broker is representing more than one party in a
transaction, the Broker must indicate the fee paid by each party to the
transaction.
         (ii)   The fee to be paid to the Broker or, for purposes of net
listing agreements pursuant to 35 RCNY §
62-18, the amount to be paid to the seller.
         (iii)   All services provided by the Broker.
         (iv)   The Broker's duty to act in the interest of his or her client.
         (v)   The Broker's duty to disclose any financial interest of the
Broker in the transaction beyond the fee specified in the agreement.
         (vi)   The Broker's duty to account for all money and property of his
or her client that is entrusted to the Broker.
         (vii)   The purchasers' and sellers' right to be represented by an
Attorney.
         (viii)   Agreements for the transfer of an interest in a Medallion
must provide the following additional terms:
            (A)   The Broker's duty to disclose any facts known to the Broker
which materially impacts the value of the Medallion.
            (B)   If the Broker is representing the seller, the Broker's duty
to disclose all offers to purchase the Medallion.
      (5)   The following documents must be attached to each agreement:
         (i)   A copy of the Broker's annual disclosure, signed by the Broker's
client, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commission.
         (ii)   A disclosure of the Broker's actual interest in the
transaction, signed by the Broker's client and affirmed by the Broker as
accurate and complete, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commission.
         (iii)   A copy of a Broker Client Rights document, signed by the
Broker's client, in a form and manner prescribed by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $2,500 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(c)    revocation
 
   (d)   Broker Duties. 
      (1)   Brokers must act in the interest of their clients.
      (2)   Brokers must disclose any financial interest in a transaction, in a
form and manner prescribed by the Commission.
      (3)   Brokers must disclose all fees received from any party related to
services provided by the Broker in a transaction, in a form and manner
prescribed by the Commission.
      (4)   [Reserved.]
      (5)   In transactions including the transfer of an interest in a
Medallion:
         (i)   Brokers must disclose any facts known to the Broker which
materially impact the value of the Medallion, including but not limited to, any
liens, encumbrances or judgments against the medallion or an upcoming
wheelchair accessible vehicle cycle known to the Broker.
         (ii)   If a Broker is representing the seller, the Broker must
disclose all offers to purchase the Medallion.
         (iii)   Prior to the transfer of an interest in a Medallion, Brokers
must provide their clients and the Commission with a closing statement, in a
form and manner prescribed by the Commission, as well as an executed agreement
with all attachments required by paragraph (4) of subdivision (c) of this
section.
      (6)   In transactions including the financing or refinancing of a
Medallion:
         (i)   A Broker must provide his or her client with all documents
provided by the lender for such client.
         (ii)   Brokers must disclose all material loan terms, in a form and
manner prescribed by the Commission.
         (iii)   For financing or refinancing transactions that do not include
the transfer of an interest in a Medallion, Brokers must provide the Commission
with the disclosure of all material loan terms and an executed agreement with
all attachments required by paragraph (4) of subdivision (c) of this section
within 10 business days of the transaction.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $1,000 - $2,500 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-19(d)(1) - (6) or revocation
 
      (7)   Brokers must account for all money and property of their clients
that is entrusted to the Broker.
      (8)   Brokers may not charge or request any additional payment or fee in
excess of the dollar amount or percentage set forth in the Brokerage Agreement.
      (9)   Within 10 business days following any transaction, a Broker must
forward to his or her client all monies due to such client.
         (i)   Exception. The Broker may maintain the monies due to such client
in an Escrow account to permit recovery against outstanding obligations owed by
the client.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $2,500 - $10,000 and/or suspension
62-19(d)(7) - (9) or revocation; restitution may be        Appearance REQUIRED
                  ordered.
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-20 Business Procedures – Record Keeping.
   (a)   Retention of Records. A Broker must keep and maintain all documents
required by 35 RCNY §
62-19 and any other documents provided by the Broker and signed by the Broker's
client for ten years.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 - $1,000 for each missing Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-20(a)    document
 
   (b)   Inspection of Records. Upon demand, a Broker must furnish all records
and documents listed above to the Commission or its representatives for
inspection.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-20(b)
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-21 Business Procedures – Handling of Funds.
   (a)   A Broker must not pay any part of funds advanced by the transferee to
the transferor or any other person without the written approval of the
transferee.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $2,500 Appearance REQUIRED
62-21(a)
 
   (b)   The Broker must not commingle funds advanced from a transferee with
his or her own funds. He or she must deposit advanced funds promptly in a
separate, federally insured, special account.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,500 - $10,000 and/or suspension or Appearance REQUIRED
62-21(b)    revocation; restitution may be ordered.
 
   (c)   The Broker must provide written notification to the person who
advanced the funds, giving the name and address of the bank in which the money
was deposited and the amount of the deposit.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $500 Appearance REQUIRED
62-21(c)
 
   (d)   The Broker must not retain any of the interest earned from the
deposited funds unless he or she has written permission from the principal.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $500; restitution may be ordered. Appearance REQUIRED
62-21(d)
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 62-22 Business Procedures – Advertising.
   (a)   A Broker must indicate in any advertisement placed by the Broker that
he or she is a licensed Broker.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $750 Appearance REQUIRED
62-22(a)
 
   (b)   A Broker must not use deceptive or misleading advertising.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $2,000 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-22(b)
 
§ 62-23 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules.
   (a)   Bribery. A Licensee or anyone acting on behalf of the Licensee must
not offer or give any gift, gratuity or thing of value to any employee,
representative or member of the Commission, or any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §  $2,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(a)
 
   (b)   Failure to Report Bribery. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission any request or demand for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by any
employee, representative or member of the Commission, or any other public
servant.
 
35 RCNY §  $500 - $1,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(b)
 
   (c)   Fraud, Theft. A Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit any act
of fraud, misrepresentation or theft while performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  $100 - $2,500 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(c)
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  $100 - $2,500 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(d)
 
   (e)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  $100 - $2,500 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(e)
 
   (f)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. A Licensee, his or her representatives,
and his or her employees must not threaten, harass, or abuse any governmental
or Commission representative, public servant, or other person while performing
the duties and responsibilities of a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  $1,000 - $2,500 Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(f)
 
   (g)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. A Licensee, his or her
representatives, and his or her employees must not use or attempt to use any
physical force against a Commission representative, public servant, or other
person while performing the duties and responsibilities of a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  $2,000 - $5,000 and/or suspension or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(g)
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Licensee must immediately notify the Commission when he or she is
convicted of a crime. The Licensee must also report any criminal convictions of
any of the Licensee's Business Entity Persons or employees.
      (2)   The notification must be in writing and accompanied by a certified
copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the Clerk of the Court.
 
35 RCNY §  $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(h)
 
         (i)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Licensee must
cooperate with all law enforcement officers and all authorized representatives
of the Commission, and comply with all their reasonable requests.
 
35 RCNY §  $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
62-23(i)
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Licensee must answer or comply with all questions,
communications, or directives received from the Commission or its
representatives within 72 hours. An emergency communication must be answered
immediately.
 
35 RCNY §  $250 - $750 and/or suspension Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-23(j)(1)
 
      (2)   A Broker must answer all summonses from the Commission on the
scheduled date.
 
35 RCNY §  $250 - $750 and/or suspension Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-23(j)(2)
 
   (k)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   A Broker may not retaliate against any Owner or client for making a
good faith complaint against any Broker.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Owner or client or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Owner or client.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the owner
            or client for losses for the first
35 RCNY §  violation and a fine of $10,000 plus       Appearance NOT REQUIRED
62-23(k)    restitution to the owner or client for the
            second violation and subsequent violations
            within five years.
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
Chapter 63: Taxicab Agent Rules
§ 63-01 Scope of the Chapter.
   (a)   To establish that an individual or Business Entity must be licensed by
the Commission to act as an Agent.
   (b)   To provide the qualifications, requirements and procedures for getting
and maintaining an Agent's License.
   (c)   To set forth the penalties for violating these Rules.
§ 63-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated service or business by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License from the
Commission for the service or business.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-528 of the Administrative Code and can subject the violator to padlocking
and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   An Agent may be held jointly and severally liable for violation of 35
RCNY
Chapter 58 (Medallion Taxicab Service) of these Rules when acting in the
capacity of a Medallion Owner.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 63-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Agent is an individual or Business Entity that has been Licensed by
the Commission to operate or facilitate the operation of one or more Taxicabs
on behalf of the Taxicab owner.
   (b)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal License as an Agent.
   (c)   Business Entity. In this Chapter, a Business Entity may be a sole
proprietorship, a corporation, or a partnership.
   (d)   License in this Chapter means a License to be an Agent.
   (e)   Limited Business Entity Person shall mean all Business Entity Persons
except for corporate shareholders holding less than ten percent (10%) of the
stock of the corporation.
   (f)   Merchant. An individual or Business Entity who holds a Commission
License and who has agreed to do the following:
      (1)   Facilitate contracts between Taxicab Technology Service Providers
and Commission-approved banks, and
      (2)   Contract to provide credit/debit card services for in-cab payment
of Taxicab fares.
   (g)   Technology System Provider shall have the same meaning given such term
in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (h)   Technology System shall have the same meaning given such term in 35
RCNY §
51-03.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 63-04 Licensing – Requirements.
   (a)   License Required. An individual or Business Entity must first obtain a
License from the Commission before acting as an Agent.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
63-04(a)
 
   (b)   Who May File an Application. An application or renewal application for
an Agent's License may only be submitted by the following:
      (1)   An individual
      (2)   The Proprietor, on behalf of a sole proprietorship
      (3)   A general partner on behalf of a partnership
      (4)   An officer or director on behalf of a corporation
      (5)   A member on behalf of a limited liability company.
   (c)   Certification. The application must contain a sworn and notarized
statement by the person filing the application that the information contained
in the application is true.
   (d)   Fingerprinting and Background Investigations.
      (1)   For the purpose of securing criminal history records from the New
York State Division of Criminal Justice Services, an individual Applicant and
all Limited Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity Applicant must be
fingerprinted.
      (2)   The Applicant must pay any processing fee required by the New York
State Division of Criminal Justice Services.
   (e)   Bond.
      (1)   An Applicant for an original or renewal Agent's License must
deposit a fifty thousand ($50,000) dollar bond payable to the City of New York
with the Commission. The bond must be provided by one or more sureties approved
by the Commission.
      (2)   The bond must guarantee that the Applicant or Licensee will comply
with the provisions of the Administrative Code, observe all applicable rules or
regulations of the Commission, pay all fines imposed by the Commission, and pay
all judgments or settlements arising from any action connected with the Agent's
License.
      (3)   The Agent is immediately liable for any fine or judgment as soon as
the amount is determined or, in case of an appeal, when the final determination
is issued.
      (4)   The bond must remain in effect for one year following the
expiration or revocation of the License.
   (f)   Identify Business Entity Persons. Upon application for a License or
License renewal or upon request, an Agent must provide the Commission with the
identity of all of the Agent's Business Entity Persons.
   (g)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (h)   Remission of Taxes and Surcharges. An Applicant, including an
applicant for a renewal License, must timely remit, and provide proof of
remission, of any outstanding taxes or surcharges owed by the Applicant. An
Applicant's responsibility for taxes and surcharges owed with respect to a
particular Medallion for which the Applicant is also responsible shall be
limited to such periods that such Medallion is managed by Applicant.
   (i)   Business Entities. An Applicant which is a Business Entity must
provide the following documents:
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations. If the Applicant is a corporation, it must file with
its application:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation
         (ii)   A list of officers and shareholders
         (iii)   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). If the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
   (j)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (k)   Fit to Hold a License. An Applicant (including the individual
Applicant and all Limited Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
Applicant) for an original License must demonstrate that they are Fit to Hold a
License.
(Amended City Record 8/2/2016, eff. 9/1/2016)
§ 63-05 Licensing – Term.
   (a)   Maximum One-Year Term. The term of an Agent's License may be up to one
year, but will expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued or
renewed, unless earlier suspended or revoked by the Commission.
   (b)   No Longer Meets Requirements. If at any time during the term of the
License, the Commission learns that the Agent no longer meets the requirements
for an Agent's License, the Commission may deny any renewal application, or
suspend or revoke the current License, after appropriate notice and hearing.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in (c) above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends, provided that the Agent holding the License may continue
to operate the Taxicabs he/she operated prior to the imposition of the
suspension, consistent with Paragraph (3) of this Subdivision. This is true
even if the Applicant has filed an application for a renewal.
      (3)   If an Agent's License has been suspended by the Commission, the
Agent:
         (i)   Will not be authorized to manage or operate any new Medallion(s)
at any time that the Agent's license is suspended.
         (ii)   May not renew any agreement to manage any Medallion(s) while
the Agent's license is suspended.
         (iii)   Must notify each Medallion Owner who is using the suspended
Agent to manage the Owner's Medallion within five (5) business days of the
suspension:
            I.   Of the dates during which the Agent is suspended, and
            II.   that the Medallion Owner has the option to terminate its
contract with the Agent, or, if its contract will expire during the period of
suspension, that the Medallion Owner has the option to not renew its contract.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 Appearance REQUIRED
63-05(d)(3)
 
(Amended City Record 8/2/2016, eff. 9/1/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 63-06 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Annual Fee. The fee for an Agent's License will be five hundred
dollars ($500) annually.
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed.
   (c)   Shorter Term. If a License is granted for a period of six months or
less, the fee will be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250).
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed License is $25.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 63-07 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Material Misstatement. The Commission will deny any application if the
Applicant makes a material misstatement or misrepresentation on the
application.
   (b)   Unlawful Acts. The Commission will deny any application if the
Applicant commits a fraudulent or unlawful act while acting as an Agent.
   (c)   Criminal Conviction. The Commission will deny an application,
including a renewal application, if the individual Applicant, or any Limited
Business Entity Person of the Applicant is convicted of a crime that under
Article 23-A of the Correction Law would provide a basis for suspension or
revocation of the License.
   (d)   Medallion-Owner Agent Violates Rules. The Commission will deny an
application for an Agent's License if the Applicant owns or manages a Medallion
and has violated any Commission Rule where the penalty for that violation is
revocation of the License.
   (e)   Violation of the Administrative Code. The Commission will deny an
application if the Applicant has violated any provision of § 19-530 of the
Administrative Code or any applicable rule of the Commission.
   (f)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application by the
expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (g)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License (Authorization), the Chairperson may seek additional
information from the Applicant. This request for additional information may be
an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of
communication. This additional consideration may result in the denial of the
application.
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 63-08 Proper Conduct.
   (a)   An Agent must not make a material misrepresentation or omission or
commit a fraudulent or unlawful act while acting as an Agent, whether Validly
Licensed or not. Such acts will include but not be limited to any of the
following:
      (1)   Presenting a Taxicab for inspection with a vehicle identification
number ("VIN") other than the one under which the vehicle is licensed by the
Commission.
      (2)   Operating a Taxicab with a vehicle identification number that has
been removed and reattached, or that is different from the VIN shown on the
Taxicab License.
      (3)   Presenting a document to the Commission that falsely states that
the insurance requirements for the Taxicab have been met.
      (4)   Bribing or attempting to bribe any officer or employee of the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $1,000 - $10,000 and/or revocation Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(a)(1)-(4)
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit any act of fraud,
misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $5,000 Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(b)
 
   (c)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $5,000 Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(c)
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $5,000 Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(d)
 
   (e)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Licensee must truthfully answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives, and summonses issued by the Commission, its
representatives or the New York City Department of Investigation.
      (2)   Upon request of the Commission, a Licensee must make the Agent's
business premises, books and records available for inspection.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and Suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(e)    compliance.
 
   (f)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(f)    days
 
   (g)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
63-08(g)    days
 
   (h)   Death or Incompetency of Taxicab Owner. An Agent who becomes aware of
the death or incompetency of an owner of an interest in a Taxicab Medallion
shall promptly inform the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-08(h)
 
         (i)   Mailing and Email Address.
      (1)   An Agent must have a working Email Address at all times.
      (2)   An Agent must report any change of Mailing Address or Email Address
to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-08(i)(1) - (2)
 
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Agent.
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Agent.
   (j)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   An Agent may not retaliate against any Driver or Owner for making a
good faith complaint against any Agent.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or Owner or withholding or
withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the Driver or Owner.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
            or owner for losses for the first violation
35 RCNY §  and a fine of $10,000 plus restitution to   Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-08(j)    the driver or owner for the second
            violation and subsequent violations within
            five years.
 
(Amended City Record 8/2/2016, eff. 9/1/2016; amended City Record 2/12/2020,
eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 63-09 Personal Conduct – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   An Agent must not dispatch a taxicab or other vehicle that is
unlicensed.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $2,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
63-09(a)    days
 
   (b)   An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab that does not have a current
Medallion affixed to the Taxicab.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $2,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
63-09(b)    days
 
   (c)   An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab or other vehicle unless the
registration of such Taxicab or other vehicle is Valid.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
63-09(c)    days
 
(Amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 63-10 Agent's Business Premises.
An Agent who operates one or more Taxicabs that are returned at the end of a
shift must maintain business premises in an appropriately-zoned location. The
location must allow or provide for, and the Agent must provide or maintain, all
of the following:
   (a)   Sufficient off-street parking space at or near the business premises
to store the lesser of:
      (1)   Twenty-five (25) vehicles, or
      (2)   Fifty percent (50%) of the Taxicabs leased on a daily or shift
basis, plus five percent (5%) of the Taxicabs leased for longer than one day.
   (b)   Sufficient office space to conduct business and keep all records
required by the Commission, including trip sheets and Driver records.
   (c)   Regular business hours, including the hours of 9:00 a.m. through 5:00
p.m. every weekday other than legal holidays.
   (d)   A business address and telephone number on file with the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $500 - $1,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
63-10(a)-(d) compliance
 
   (e)   "Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be posted in a form and format
prescribed by the Commission.
         (i)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site.
         (ii)   The "Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be:
            •   conspicuously posted, such as next to a payment window or other
place where drivers regularly conduct business within the Business Premises,
and,
            •   free of other signage in the immediate area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
63-10(e)    hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
§ 63-11 Vehicle Operation.
   (a)   Provide a List of Taxicabs Being Operated by Agent. An Agent must
provide the Commission with a list of all Taxicabs operated by the Agent,
annually and upon request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-11(a)
 
   (b)   Safety. An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab unless all equipment,
including brakes, tires, lights, signals and trouble lights are in good working
order. The Taxicab must meet all requirements and specifications of the New
York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and Chapter 67 of these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-11(b)
 
   (c)   No Unlicensed Drivers. 
      (1)   An Agent may not permit a Taxicab to be operated for hire unless
the driver has in his or her possession a Valid TLC Driver License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
63-11(c)(1)
 
      (2)   Exceptions. An Agent may permit a person who does not possess a TLC
Driver License to drive the vehicle only when all of the following
circumstances are met:
         (i)   The Roof Light is turned off;
         (ii)   The driver has logged off from the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
63-11(c)(2)
 
      (3)   The Commission will post on New York City's open data platform a
list of Drivers holding Valid TLC Driver Licenses.
   (d)   Hours of Operation; Maximum Driving Hours. An Agent may not require a
Driver to operate one or more Taxicabs for more than 12 consecutive hours.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-11(d)
 
   (e)   Agent Responsibility for Accessible Taxicab Operation.
      (1)   An Agent must allow only Licensed Approved Taxicab Drivers to
operate an Owner's Accessible Taxicab. The License of a Driver who is not an
Approved Driver is not Valid for operation of an Accessible Taxicab.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
63-11(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Dispatch Fee. An Agent which is processing payment of Dispatch Fees
to Drivers must
         (i)   Pay to each Driver of the Taxicab, in cash, on a weekly basis,
an amount equal to the sum of all Dispatch Fees earned by each Driver and paid
by the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher on behalf of each Driver, and
         (ii)   Provide to each Driver an itemized receipt for all Dispatch
Fees earned and paid.
         (iii)   An Agent is not permitted to make any deductions from Dispatch
Fees.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-11(e)(2)
 
   (f)   [Reserved.]
   (g)   Agent Responsibility to Remit Collected Funds. An Agent must remit to
the appropriate party all taxes and surcharges collected on behalf of a
Medallion Owner. An Agent's responsibility for taxes and surcharges owed with
respect to a particular Medallion is limited to such periods that such
Medallion is managed by the Agent.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 - $10,000 and suspension until
63-11(g)    compliance or revocation; restitution to    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            the owner may be ordered.
 
(Amended City Record 8/2/2016, eff. 9/1/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 63-12 Vehicle – Equipment.
   (a)   Vehicle Safety Equipment. An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab unless
it is in compliance with the provisions of 35 RCNY §
58-35.
   (b)   Distress Signal. An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab that is not
equipped with a help or distress signaling light system, as required in 35 RCNY
§
58-34(d) and in accordance with specifications established in 35 RCNY §
67-11.
   (c)   Taximeter.
      (1)   An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab unless it is equipped with a
Taximeter as required in 35 RCNY §
58-37 and in accordance with the specifications established in 35 RCNY §
67-09.
      (2)   An Agent must not tamper with, alter, repair or attempt to repair
any of the following:
         (i)   A Taximeter
         (ii)   Any Seal affixed to the taximeter by a licensed Taximeter
repair shop or other authorized facility
         (iii)   The Taxicab Technology System
         (iv)   Any cable mechanism or electrical wiring of a Taximeter or
Taxicab Technology System
      (3)   An Agent must not make any change in a vehicle's mechanism or its
tires that would affect the operation of the Taximeter or of the Taxicab
Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $250 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
63-12(c)(1)-(2) 30 days
 
   (d)   Technology System Capable of Servicing Accessible E-Hail Requests. 
      (1)   An Agent must not dispatch an Accessible Taxicab unless it is
equipped with a Technology System capable of servicing Accessible E-Hail
Requests.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-12(d)(1)
 
      (2)   An Agent must replace or repair a Technology System that is not
capable of servicing Accessible E-Hail Requests promptly upon being notified to
do so and in no event later than 48 hours after receiving notification.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-12(d)(2)
 
      (3)   An Agent must not allow an Accessible Taxicab to operate with a
Technology System that is not capable of servicing Accessible E-Hail Requests
for more than 48 hours without repair or replacement of such Technology System.

 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-12(d)(3)
 
      (4)   An Agent must not
         (i)   Tamper with the Technology System; or
         (ii)   Tamper with the geographic locator equipment; or
         (iii)   Disable the Technology System’s ability to receive Accessible
E-Hail Requests; or
         (iv)   Render the Accessible E-Hail Request functionality inoperable
in any way.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
63-12d)(4)(i-iv)
 
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 2/12/2020,
eff. 3/13/2020; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 63-13 Vehicle Equipment – Trip Sheet.
An Agent must not dispatch a Taxicab unless all of the following are present in
the Taxicab:
   (a)   An operable Technology System.
   (b)   The TLC Drives License.
   (c)   The Rate Card, in a frame next to the frame for the TLC Driver
License.
   (d)   An insurance card or copy, unless the owner is self-insured and has
noted this fact on the Rate Card.
   (e)   All notices required to be posted in the Taxicab.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 63-14 Vehicle Equipment – Taxicab Technology System.
   (a)   Equip Taxicabs with Technology System. An Agent must ensure that each
of Agent's Taxicabs is equipped with the Technology System by the compliance
date established in 35 RCNY §
58-39. The Technology System must comply with the specifications established in
35 RCNY §
67-15.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-14(a)
 
   (b)   Good Working Order. For any Taxicab that is required to be equipped
with the Technology System, the equipment must be in good working order at all
times.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-14(b)
 
   (c)   Malfunction or Failure to Operate.
      (1)   If the Technology System malfunctions or fails to operate, the
Agent must file an incident report with the licensed Technology System Provider
within two hours following the discovery of the malfunction or as soon as the
Agent reasonably should have known of such malfunction.
      (2)   If the Driver or Taxicab owner previously filed an incident report,
the Agent will not be required to file a separate incident report. The Agent
must verify that the report has been filed by obtaining the incident report
number from the Driver, owner or Technology System Provider.
      (3)   Upon instruction from the owner the Agent must meet the appointment
for repair scheduled by the Technology System Provider following the incident
report.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-14(c)(1)-(3)
 
   (d)   48-Hour Repair Deadline. An Agent must not allow a Taxicab in which
the Technology System (or any material feature of the Technology System) is not
functioning to be operated more than 48 hours following the timely filing of an
incident report.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
63-14(d)
 
   (e)   No Driver Lease Payments through the Technology System. An Agent may
not require or allow a driver to make a lease payment pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-21 utilizing the Technology System.
 
            Fine: First violation $500.
35 RCNY §  Second and subsequent violations: $1,000 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-14(e)    and/or suspension of the Agent for up to
            thirty days.
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 63-15 Technology System Provider (TSP) Equipment De-Installation.
   (a)   An Agent may not de-install the Technology System for medallion
taxicab vehicles for which the Agent is not the contractee, or the listed
Agent.
   (b)   The Agent must inform the Technology System Provider that is providing
service to a medallion taxicab of the de-installation of that taxicab's
Technology System within twenty-four (24) hours of de-installation.
   (c)   The Agent must return the Technology System(s) that the Agent de-
installs to the Technology Service Provider within five (5) business days of
de-installation.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
63-15(a) - (c)
 
(Added City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 63-16 Leasing of Medallions from Medallion Owners.
   (a)   Lease must be in writing. 
      (1)   All lease agreements between Agents and Medallion owners, including
any amendments to such leases, must be in writing and signed by the Agent and
Medallion or Taxicab owner. Electronic signatures are permissible for
electronic leases.
      (2)   A copy of the fully executed lease must be provided to the
Medallion or Taxicab owner upon lease execution and upon the owner's request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 per missing lease Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-16(a)
 
   (b)   Terms. Each lease between an Agent and a Medallion owner must provide:
      (1)   The amount and frequency of lease payments.
      (2)   All costs and fees that may or will be charged to the Medallion
Owner by the Agent.
         (i)   For each cost and fee that will be charged, the lease must
provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the cost or fee.
         (ii)   For each cost and fee that may be charged, the lease must
provide in clear and unambiguous language an explanation of the conditions that
will result in the imposition of such cost or fee.
         (iii)   If a cancellation fee is included in the lease, the
cancellation fee must be reasonable and the lease must specify the minimum
prior notice that must be provided by the owner to avoid the cancellation fee.
      (3)   All leases must include the following provisions:
         (i)   The Agent is responsible for paying to New York City and New
York State agencies all taxes and surcharges collected on behalf of a Medallion
Owner during the periods that such Medallion is leased by the Agent. Failure to
pay any taxes or surcharges collected by the Agent should be reported by the
Medallion Owner to TLC.
         (ii)   TLC rules prohibit Agents from retaliating against owners for
complaints filed with the TLC. Any retaliation should be reported to the TLC.
         (iii)   TLC rules prohibit Agents from charging any fees to owners
unless specifically provided in the written lease between the Agent and the
Medallion Owner. Any charges not specified in such lease should be reported to
the TLC.
      (4)   If the lease allows the Agent to change the lease payment amount,
the agreement must include the following:
         (i)   The Agent must provide the owner with no less than 60 days'
notice before changing the lease payment amount.
         (ii)   Such notice must be sent by certified US Mail to the owner.
         (iii)   The Owner has the ability to terminate the lease agreement at
any time during the 60-day notice period without any fee or penalty.
   (c)   Timely Payment. Agents must make all lease payments as required by the
lease agreement.
   (d)   No Overcharges. Agents may not charge or request any additional
payment or any fee in excess of any amount set forth in the lease agreement.
   (e)   No interest in Medallion. A lease agreement may not grant the Agent
any rights in or to a Medallion other than the dispatch and operation of the
Taxicab to which the Medallion is affixed for the period specified. A lease
agreement may not grant an Agent a right or option to purchase.
 
               Fine: First violation $500.
               Second and subsequent violations: $1,000
               and/or suspension of the Agent for up to
35 RCNY §     thirty days. In addition to the penalty  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-16(b) - (e) payable to the Commission, restitution
               to the owner, equal to the excess or
               unauthorized charge that was charged to
               the owner.
 
   (f)   Owner Receipts. Agents must provide owners with receipts for all
payments, deductions and charges, with applicable lease provision cited for any
deduction or charge.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
63-16(f)
 
   (g)   Annual Accounting. Agents must provide to owners an annual accounting
of all taxes, fees, insurance and other costs paid or remitted on behalf of the
Medallion owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
63-16(f)
 
   (h)   Maintenance of Records. An Agent must maintain for a period of three
years from the date a lease agreement with a Medallion owner expires or is
cancelled:
      (1)   A copy of the executed lease and any lease amendments;
      (2)   Records of all itemized lease payments paid to owners;
      (3)   Records of all itemized payments received from owners; and
      (4)   Copies of all annual accountings prepared by the Agent for the
owner.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 for each missing item Appearance REQUIRED
63-16(h)
 
(Added City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
Chapter 64: Licensing and Rules for Taximeter Businesses and Manufacturers
§ 64-01 Scope of the Chapter.
   (a)   To establish a formal procedure for the licensing and supervision of
businesses that manufacture, sell, repair, and install Taximeters for Medallion
Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries.
   (b)   To establish comprehensive criteria for the ownership of such
businesses.
   (c)   To establish operating rules to protect customers and the public.
   (d)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these rules.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated service or business by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License from the
Commission for the service or business.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-528 of the Administrative Code and can subject the violator to padlocking
and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they will be shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section will also
state whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by
48 RCNY Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred
until 30 days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 64-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Taximeter License.
   (b)   Certified Taximeter Technician. A technician certified by a Licensed
Taximeter Manufacturer to perform work on its Taximeters.
   (c)   Licensee. When the term "Licensee" is used by itself, in this Chapter
– and in this Chapter ONLY – it refers to a Taximeter Licensee.
   (d)   Manufacturer's Representative. An individual or Business Entity
appointed by a Taximeter Manufacturer to hold a License on behalf of that
manufacturer and to carry out that manufacturer's duties and responsibilities
as a Licensee under this chapter.
   (e)   MTA Tax is the 50 cent tax on taxicab trips imposed by Article 29-A of
the NYS Tax Law.
   (f)   Taximeter. An instrument or device approved by the Commission that
automatically calculates and that plainly indicates the charge to a passenger
for hire of a Licensed Taxicab or Licensed Street Hail Livery.
   (g)   Taximeter Business. A business licensed by the Commission that sells
new or used equipment or installs, repairs, adjusts, tests, seals, or
calibrates Taximeters and/or Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Roof Lights.
   (h)   Taximeter License(e). Term used when the rule applies to both a
Taximeter Business License and a Taximeter Manufacturer's License.
   (i)   Taximeter Manufacturer. An entity that manufacturers Taximeters and
has been licensed by the Commission; only Taximeters made by a Licensed
Taximeter Manufacturer may be installed or used in Taxicabs and Street Hail
Liveries.
   (j)   Technology System shall have the same meaning given such term in 35
RCNY §
51-03.
   (k)   Wiring Harness. Any wire or collection of wires that is connected in
any manner whatsoever to a Taximeter or in any way affects the operation of a
Taximeter.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Licensees. An Applicant for a Taximeter License or its renewal may be
an individual or a Business Entity.
   (b)   Certification. Any new or renewal application for a Taximeter License
must be notarized and filed on a form approved by the Chairperson. The
Applicant must swear (or affirm) that the information in the Application is
true, under penalty of perjury.
   (c)   Proof of Identity. The individual or Business Entity Person submitting
the application for a Taximeter License must provide to the Commission:
      (1)   A valid form of photo identification issued by the United States, a
state or territory, or any political subdivision of a state or territory
      (2)   A valid social security number.
   (d)   Age. The individual or Business Entity Person applying for a Taximeter
License or its renewal must be at least 18 years of age.
   (e)   Proficiency in the English Language. The individual or Business Entity
Person applying for a Taximeter License or its renewal must be able to speak,
read, write, and understand the English language.
   (f)   Fit to Hold a License. The individual or Business Entity Person
applying for a Taximeter License or its renewal must demonstrate that they are
Fit to Hold a License, as determined in part through a review of the criminal
history records from the New York State Division of Criminal Justice Services
to be secured through fingerprinting of the following:
      (1)   Each of the Applicant's Business Entity Persons
      (2)   An individual or the Business Entity Persons who provide funds for
the Applicant unless the provider is a licensed bank or loan company. The new
Applicant must pay any processing fees required by the Commission or the
Division of Criminal Justice Services.
   (g)   Partnership Filings. When the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with its License application a certified copy of the partnership certificate
from the clerk of the county where the principal place of business is located.
In addition, each partner must satisfy the requirements of identity, age, and
English language proficiency, as specified in 35 RCNY §
64-04(c) - (e), above.
   (h)   Corporate or LLC Filings. When the Applicant is a corporation, it must
file with its License application all of the following:
      (1)   One of the following certificates:
         (i)   A certified copy(ies) of its certificate(s) of incorporation
with a filing receipt issued by the secretary of state if the Applicant was
incorporated less than one year from the date of the License application
         (ii)   A certificate of good standing if the Applicant was
incorporated more than one year from the date of the License application
         (iii)   A copy of the certificate of incorporation, filing receipt,
and authority to do business within the State of New York if the Applicant is
an out-of-state corporation
      (2)   A list of its officers and shareholders, including names, residence
addresses, telephone numbers, and percentage of ownership interest of each
shareholder
      (3)   A certified copy of the minutes of the organizational meeting at
which the current officers were elected
      (4)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). When the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application all of the following:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A copy of its operating agreement
         (iii)   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
         (i)   Uniqueness of Name. The Commission has the right to reject the
proposed name of any Taximeter Business that the Commission finds to be
substantially similar to any name in use by another Taximeter Business
Licensee.
   (j)   Payment of Fines and Fees. 
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (k)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 64-05 Licensing – Bond Required.
   (a)   Amount of Bond. An Applicant for a Taximeter License or renewal must
deposit with the Commission a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000) bond payable to
the City of New York. The bond must be provided by one or more sureties
approved by the Commission.
   (b)   Bond Guarantees. The bond must guarantee that the License Applicant or
Licensee will comply with all provisions of the Administrative Code of the City
of New York, observe all applicable rules or regulations of the Commission, pay
all fines imposed by the Commission, and pay all judgments or settlements
arising from any action connected in any way with the Taximeter License.
   (c)   Fines and Judgments. The Taximeter Licensee is immediately liable for
the payment of any fine or judgment when the amount is determined or upon final
determination of an appeal and if the fine is not paid as required by 35 RCNY §
64-02(c), the Commission may draw upon the bond.
§ 64-06 Licensing – Financial Disclosure.
Each individual Applicant and each Business Entity Person of a Business Entity
Applicant for a new or renewal Taximeter License must file a financial
disclosure statement with the Commission. This financial disclosure statement
must be on a form approved by the Chairperson and must include a list of
assets, liabilities and bank accounts and must specify any interest in any
Licensed Medallion Taxicab and any other information requested by the
Chairperson.
§ 64-07 Licensing – Fees and Term of License.
   (a)   Annual Fee. Every application for a Taximeter License must be
accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $500 for each location to be
Licensed.
   (b)   Half-Year Fee. The application fee for any Taximeter License to be
issued for a period of six months or less will be one-half of the annual fee.
   (c)   Form of Payment. The application fee must be paid by credit card,
money order, or certified check.
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed License is $25.
   (f)   Term of License. The term of a Taximeter License will be one year or
less and each License will expire on the 31st day of March.
   (g)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 60
days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (h)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (g) of this section to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 64-08 Licensing – Cause for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Continuously Comply. Whenever the Commission determines
that the Taximeter Licensee no longer meets the requirements for the License,
the Commission may suspend or revoke the License and deny any application for
renewal.
   (b)   Summary Suspension. Nothing in this section limits the authority of
the Commission to summarily suspend any Taximeter License when a threat to
public health, safety, or welfare exists.
   (c)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 90
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application by the
expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (d)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License (Authorization), the Chairperson may seek additional
information from the Applicant. This request for additional information may be
an in-person interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of
communication. This additional consideration may result in the denial of the
application. Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame
requested, or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a
denial of the application.
§ 64-09 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Taximeter Business License Required. An individual or Business Entity
must not sell, install, repair, adjust, inspect, calibrate, or maintain
Taximeters or install or repair seals, wiring harnesses or other equipment
relating to the operation of a Taximeter or roof light for use on any Taxicab
or Street Hail Livery, without a Valid Taximeter License.
   (b)   Taximeter Manufacturer's License Required. A Taximeter cannot be used
in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery unless the Taximeter's Manufacturer has been
licensed by the Commission under these rules.
   (c)   Licensed Technology System Provider Required. An individual,
partnership, corporation, or other business entity cannot manufacture, sell,
install, repair, adjust, calibrate, or maintain a Technology System that is not
provided by a licensed Technology System Provider.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-10 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law.
   (a)   Licenses and Permits. A Taximeter Licensee must obtain Licenses and
permits required by city, state, or federal law.
   (b)   Occupational Safety & Health Administration. A Taximeter Licensee must
comply with all applicable Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
standards and requirements at the Licensee's place of business, as well as all
other federal, state, and local laws governing its business.
   (c)   Payment of All Fines and Fees. A Taximeter Licensee must pay all
fines, fees, and taxes it owes to any federal, state, or local governmental
jurisdiction.
   (d)   Workers' Compensation Laws. A Taximeter Licensee must comply with all
laws regarding worker's compensation and disability benefits, as well as all
federal laws regarding the withholding of taxes and payment of FICA and other
withholding taxes.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-10(a)-(d) until compliance
 
§ 64-11 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited.
   (a)   A Taximeter Licensee must not use or permit any other person to use
his business premises or office of record for any unlawful purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-11(a)    up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (b)   A Taximeter Licensee must not conceal any evidence of a crime
connected with his business premises or office of record.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-11(b)    up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (c)   A Taximeter Licensee must immediately report to the Commission and the
police any attempt to use his business premises to commit a crime.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $100 - $350 fine and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
64-11(c)    to 30 days
 
   (d)   A Taximeter Licensee must not file with the Commission any statement
that he or she knows or reasonably should know to be false, misleading,
deceptive, or materially incomplete.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
64-11(d)
 
§ 64-12 General Requirements – Notice to TLC.
   (a)   Material Change in Information. A Taximeter Licensee must notify the
Commission of any material change in the information contained in its current
Taximeter License application or renewal.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-12(a)    up to 30 days
 
   (b)   Suspension or Revocation of License. A Taximeter Licensee must
immediately notify the Commission in writing of any suspension or revocation of
any license granted to the Licensee, or any other person acting on his or her
behalf, by any agency of the City or State of New York, or the government of
the United States.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-12(b)    until compliance
 
§ 64-13 Business Requirements – Fees Charged by Licensees.
   (a)   Filing of Fee Schedule with TLC. A Taximeter Business must file with
the Commission a schedule of current fees for all services related to the sale,
repair, installation, and calibration of Taximeters, including inspections,
tests, adjustments, installations, corrections, or repairs.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $50 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-13(a)
 
   (b)   Filing of Fee Changes with TLC. A Taximeter Business must file any
change in fees with the Commission at least ten days before the fees are
scheduled to change.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $50 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-13(b)
 
   (c)   Prominent Display of Fee Schedule. A Taximeter Business must not
engage in any business unless a current schedule of inspection and repair
charges, including hourly rates (if applicable) is displayed clearly to the
public on the business premises. All fee schedules must be filed with the
Commission before being displayed.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $50 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-13(c)
 
   (d)   Overcharges Prohibited. For any work involving Taximeters, a Taximeter
Business must not charge more than the fees set by its fee schedule.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $50 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-13(d)
 
§ 64-14 Business Requirements – Premises and Equipment.
   (a)   A Taximeter Business must ensure that its business premises meet the
following conditions at all times:
      (1)   Location within an area zoned for this business activity
      (2)   Sufficient size to simultaneously accommodate at least three (3)
vehicles of the type(s) and model(s) licensed by the Commission
      (3)   Sufficient illumination and space in the areas used for inspection,
testing, and calibration to enable proper inspections and tests required by
these regulations
      (4)   Sufficient waiting area and restroom facilities for customers
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-14(a)(1)-(4) until compliance
 
      (5)   All signs required by law and these rules displayed, including
"Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be posted in a form and format prescribed
by the Commission.
         (i)   The Commission will post the proper form and format on its Web
site.
         (ii)   The "Driver's Bill of Rights" sign must be:
            •   conspicuously posted, such as next to a payment window or other
place where drivers regularly conduct business within the Business Premises,
and,
            •   free of other signage in the immediate area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
64-14(a)(5) hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (b)   A Taximeter Business must operate its business only within the
structures described in the certificate of occupancy for the premises. No
installation, adjustment, correction, calibration, or repairs of any type can
be performed on a public street or any facility other than the Taximeter
Business premises.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
64-14(b)
 
   (c)   A Taximeter Business must be equipped with, at a minimum, the
equipment the Commission requires for the repair and installation of
Taximeters.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-14(c)    until compliance
 
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 64-15 Business Requirements – Maintenance of Required Equipment.
   (a)   A Taximeter Business must properly maintain all equipment required by
the Commission and any other equipment required by law or regulation. Proper
maintenance includes ensuring that equipment is in good working order and is
maintained in such a manner that an inspection, test, or calibration can be
conducted in conformity with these rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
64-15(a)
 
   (b)   A Taximeter Business must not conduct any test, calibration, or
installation using equipment that is not in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
64-15(b)
 
§ 64-16 Business Requirements – Signage.
   (a)   At all times, a Taximeter Business must maintain a sign that displays
the Taximeter Business License number and the words, "Licensed Taximeter
Business". This sign must meet the specifications of the Commission and be hung
or mounted on the outside of the premises so that it is easily visible to the
public. A Taximeter Business must not display a "Licensed Taximeter Business"
sign if its Taximeter Business License or any other necessary license is
expired, suspended, or revoked.
   (b)   Each Licensed Taximeter Business must also display, on each of its
business premises, a printed sign bearing its business name, License number,
and the TLC complaint number. This sign must be affixed to the inside of a
front window or glass pane so that it is clearly legible from the outside. This
sign is not required when the business premises do not have any front windows
or glass panes.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $100 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-16(a)-(b)
 
§ 64-17 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address.
   (a)   Each Taximeter Business must designate the street address of its
primary Taximeter Business location as its Mailing Address.
   (b)   A Taximeter Business must have a working Email Address at all times.
   (c)   A Taximeter Business must report any change of Mailing Address or
Email Address to the Commission in person or by mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-17(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Taximeter Business.
   (e)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Taximeter Business.
§ 64-18 Business Requirements – General Record-Keeping and Reporting
Requirements.
   (a)   A Taximeter Business must comply with all record-keeping procedures
established by the Commission. All records required to be kept by the
Commission must be in the form and manner prescribed by the Commission and must
be maintained for a period of five (5) years.
   (b)   A Taximeter Business must account for all certification stickers
procured and issued by the Taximeter Business Licensee.
   (c)   A Taximeter Business must account for all new or used Taximeters that
the Taximeter Business Licensee buys, loans, rents, exchanges, or accepts in
trade, and report all sales, trades and exchanges to the Commission within
seven days of the transaction.
   (d)   A Taximeter Business must keep records of all sales, installations,
inspections, re-inspections, calibrations, and repairs, as well as their
results.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-18(d)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (e)   A Taximeter Business must allow agents of the Commission or other
authorized law enforcement officers to examine all the records the official
Taximeter Business is required to keep at any time.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
64-18(e)    compliance
 
   (f)   A Taximeter Business must allow any agent of the Commission or any law
enforcement official to inspect any portion of its business premises at any
time.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-18(f)
 
§ 64-19 Business Requirements – Notifications to TLC of Unauthorized or Illegal
Activity.
   (a)   A Taximeter Business must notify the Commission immediately by
telephone and in writing within 24 hours when any of the following occurs:
      (1)   A Taximeter has been presented for installation, repair, adjustment
or calibration, which the Taximeter Business knows or has reason to know has
been reported to the Commission as lost or stolen.
      (2)   A Technology System has been presented for installation, repair,
adjustment or calibration that the Taximeter Business knows or has reason to
know has not been provided by a Technology System Provider.
      (3)   A Taximeter is discovered with one or more seals removed, damaged,
broken, or tampered with.
      (4)   A person has requested that the Taximeter Business engage in any
activity prohibited by these rules.
      (5)   Any unauthorized person whom the Taximeter Business knows or should
have known to be a Licensee of the Commission or to be acting on behalf of a
Licensee has attempted to repair any Taximeter, seal, cable connection, or
electrical wiring, and the repair may have affected the operation of a
Taximeter.
      (6)   Any person has attempted to connect any unauthorized device to any
Taximeter, seal, cable connection, or electrical wiring, and the attempt may
have affected the operation of a Taximeter.
      (7)   The Taximeter Business discovers the existence of any intervening
connections, splices, "Y" connections, or direct or indirect interruptions or
connections of any kind whatsoever.
   (b)   Any notice required by the Commission must contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
      (1)   The Taxicab Medallion number or Street Hail Livery License Number
      (2)   The Driver's License number, if any, of the driver or drivers who
presented the vehicle to the Taximeter Business
      (3)   The date of the inspection or repair
      (4)   A detailed description of any items, evidence, or occurrences as
described in subdivision (a) of this section
      (5)   The names and Driver's License numbers of each individual listed as
a Driver on the Rate Card.
 
             Penalty: $500 - $1,500 and/or
             suspension up to 60 days or revocation
             (If the failure to report relates to a
35 RCNY §   medallion in which the Taximeter
64-19(a)-(b) Business has a financial or other       No reference to appearance
             interest, the penalty may include fine
             or revocation of the medallion or loss
             of medallion owner's privileges as
             provided in the Commission's rules)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-20 Business Requirements – Taximeter Business Liability for Conduct of
Employees.
   (a)   Liability for Employee Conduct. A Taximeter Business must supervise
and be responsible for the conduct of all its employees, contractors, or
agents, for activities related to the sale, installation, inspection, testing,
and calibration of Taximeters.
   (b)   Familiarizing Employees with Rules and Regulations. A Taximeter
Business must ensure that all its employees are fully familiar with all
pertinent regulatory agency rules and regulations.
   (c)   Employment of Certified Taximeter Technicians. A Taximeter Business
must employ only certified Taximeter Technicians to perform any installation,
testing, repair, or calibration of Taximeters.
   (d)   Responsibility for Maintenance of Records. The Certified Taximeter
Technician must be responsible for maintaining all records required by the
Commission and must place his or her signature on all inspection, testing,
repair, or other reports he or she prepares.
   (e)   Compliance with Laws. A Taximeter Business must ensure that all its
employees perform their duties in compliance with all relevant federal, state,
and city laws, rules, and regulations.
   (f)   List of Certified Taximeter Technicians. A Taximeter Business must
provide to the Commission, upon licensing or renewal, the names of all
Certified Taximeter Technicians it employs. The Taximeter Business must also
notify the Commission in writing of any changes in the employment of certified
Taximeter Technicians.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-20(a)-(f) up to 60 days or revocation
 
§ 64-21 Business Requirements – Sale of Taximeters.
All of the following conditions must be met for a Taximeter Business to sell a
Taximeter for use in a Medallion Taxicab or Street Hail Livery:
   (a)   The Taximeter must be manufactured by a Taximeter Manufacturer and
approved by the New York State Commissioner of Agriculture and Markets and the
Commission.
   (b)   The Medallion must be attached to the vehicle and the Vehicle, if a
Street Hail Livery, must be affiliated with a Street Hail Livery Base.
   (c)   The Taximeter Business must also perform the installation, testing,
and certification of the Taximeter/vehicle assembly.
   (d)   The Taximeter Business must inform all purchasers in writing before
the sale takes place of all restrictions imposed by the Taximeter manufacturer
or Taximeter Business Licensee regarding the testing, repairs, calibration, and
installation of the Taximeter.
   (e)   The Taximeter Business must remove, deface, or otherwise void the
validity of the certification sticker when it receives a Taximeter that has
been purchased, exchanged, or accepted in trade by the Taximeter Business
Licensee. The Taximeter Business must report such decertification to the
Commission.
   (f)   The certification sticker must conform to all specifications
established by the Commission and bear the name of the Chairperson of the
Commission.
   (g)   The Taximeter must be installed in accordance with specifications
filed with and approved by the Commission.
   (h)   No change in the method of installation can be made unless the
installation method has been filed with and approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension
64-21(a)-(h) up to 60 days or revocation for each          Appearance REQUIRED
             subdivision violated
 
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-22 Business Requirements – Change in Business Ownership.
   (a)   Approval for Transfer of Ownership. A Taximeter Business owner must
not transfer any interest in a Taximeter Business without the prior consent of
the Commission. This prohibition covers the transfer of any ownership interest
or any agreement to transfer an ownership interest in the future.
 
            Penalty: $1,000 - $5,000 fine and suspension
35 RCNY §  until consent of Commission is obtained or    Appearance REQUIRED
64-22(a)    change in business ownership is withdrawn, or
            revocation
 
   (b)   Approval for Change to Application Information. A Taximeter Business
must obtain the Commission's approval before making any change in its location,
mailing address, corporate name, trade name, corporate officers, or any other
material deviation from the description of the Taximeter Business as stated in
the original or renewal application.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
64-22(b)
 
§ 64-23 Technical Requirements – Liability for Tampering or Alteration.
   (a)   Strict Liability. By installing a seal on a Taximeter, the Taximeter
Business certifies that the Taximeter has been tested and calibrated in
accordance with these Rules. A Taximeter Business will be strictly liable for
the tampering of a meter that is sealed with an unbroken seal issued by the
Taximeter Business.
   (b)   Certification of Accuracy. By testing, installing, or calibrating a
Taximeter, the Taximeter Business certifies that at the time of the
installation, testing, or calibration, it conducted an examination and found
the wiring harness leading from the Taximeter to the speed sensor is of one-
piece construction with no intervening connectors, splices, "Y" connections, or
direct or indirect interruptions of any kind whatsoever.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-23(a)-(b) up to 60 days or revocation
 
§ 64-24 Technical Requirements – Seals.
   (a)   Installation. The installation of a Taximeter that is not capable of
being updated remotely includes affixing security seals to the Taximeter as
required by the Commission. A Taximeter Business must use seals authorized and
approved by the Commission. The security seals must be installed in the manner
prescribed by the Commission so that the security seals self-destruct when the
Taximeter or sealed part of the vehicle is disassembled.
   (b)   Record Keeping. The Taximeter Business must number each seal, keep a
record of each seal used, use seals in consecutive numerical order, and account
for any unused seal. The record of seals must be available for inspection by
the Commission as provided in this section. The record must contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
      (1)   The seal number
      (2)   The number of the Taximeter in which the seal was installed
      (3)   The Medallion number of the Taxicab or the license number of the
Street Hail Livery in which the Taximeter was installed
      (4)   The date the seal was installed
      (5)   The date and seal number of any seal removed
      (6)   The reason for installing any new seal
   (c)   Removal. A Taximeter Business must remove all seals installed by
another meter shop, whether or not the seal is broken, before installing a seal
on a Taximeter.
   (d)   Storage. Each Taximeter Business must store seals and Taximeter repair
records on its business premises either in a fireproof safe secured to the
floor of the establishment or in a locked room secured by an alarm connected to
a centralized monitoring facility.
   (e)   Security Procedures. Each Taximeter Business must maintain and file
with the Commission a description of the procedures it uses to prevent the
loss, theft, destruction, or misuse of Taximeter seals.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-24(a)-(e) up to 60 days or revocation
 
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-25 Technical Requirements – Inspection of Taximeters.
   (a)   A Taximeter must be inspected by the Taximeter Business whenever it is
installed, repaired, or calibrated. Inspection must include an examination of
the Taximeter installation and operation to verify compliance with all of the
following:
      (1)   The Taximeter specifications, type approvals, tolerances, and all
other requirements of the Commission, including, but not limited to a measured
mile run test
      (2)   The rate of fare established by the Commission
      (3)   The standards established in the sections of the Taxicab owners'
rules and Street Hail Livery Service rules regarding Taximeters
      (4)   All other applicable federal, state, and city regulations and
guidelines.
   (b)   This section does not apply to repairs made exclusively to the
printing mechanism or the resetting of the date or time on the printer receipt.

 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-25(a)-(b) up to 60 days or revocation
 
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-26 Technical Requirements – Other Repair Limitations.
A Taximeter Business must not perform any work on a Taximeter, including
inspection, testing, calibration, or repair if any of the following conditions
exist:
   (a)   No valid Taxicab License or Street Hail Livery License is presented,
unless the Taximeter is not for use in a taxicab licensed by the Commission.
   (b)   The Taximeter serial number or software version number is deleted,
defaced, or otherwise altered.
   (c)   The Taximeter has not been approved for use by the Commission.
   (d)   The Taximeter Business knows or should know that the Taximeter was
reported lost or stolen to the Commission or any other law enforcement agency.
   (e)   The Taximeter Business has not received written consent from the owner
or driver of the vehicle or his agent to perform any work on the Taximeter.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-26(a)-(e) up to 60 days or revocation
 
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-27 Technical Requirements – Recording the Results of Taximeter Tests.
   (a)   Record of Results. The Taximeter Business must record the results of
any inspections or tests, as well as the Taximeter make, model, and serial
number on the form prescribed by the Commission. The Taximeter Business
Licensee must submit the record of results to the Commission within seven (7)
days of the inspection.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
64-27(a)    compliance
 
   (b)   Certification Sticker. Once the Taximeter has passed an inspection,
the Taximeter Business, in addition to complying with subdivision (a), must
affix to the Taximeter a certification sticker prescribed and approved by the
Commission. Once removed, a certification sticker may not be re-affixed to the
Taximeter.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-277(b)   up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (c)   Security of Certification Stickers. A Taximeter Business must provide
for the safekeeping of certification stickers, control their sequence of
issuance, and ensure that the stickers are placed only on Taximeters in
accordance with these regulations.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
64-27(c)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (d)   Taxicab Hack-Up Installations. When a Taximeter is installed in
preparation for "hack-up," the Taximeter Business, in addition to complying
with subdivisions (a) and (b), must do the following:
      (1)   Prepare a vehicle "hack up" certification form approved by the
Commission at the completion of the preparatory work for vehicle "hack-up"
      (2)   Submit to the Commission, within 24 hours, all documents relating
to the installation and inspection of the Taximeter
      (3)   Provide the vehicle owner with an itemized list of all work
performed in preparation for "hack-up"
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
64-27(d)    compliance
 
§ 64-28 Technical Requirements – Failure of Tests.
   (a)   No Precondition to Perform Repairs. A Taximeter Business must not
require that repair work based on the results of a test or inspection be
performed by that Taximeter Business as a condition of performing any test or
inspection.
   (b)   Who May Perform Repair Work. The Taximeter Business must inform the
Taxicab owner or Driver or Street Hail Livery Base or Driver that any needed
work or repairs can be performed by any Licensed Taximeter Business.
   (c)   No Mandated Referrals. The Taximeter Business must not direct a
Taxicab owner or Driver or Street Hail Livery Base or Driver to use a
particular Taximeter Business to perform the needed repair work.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 fine Appearance REQUIRED
64-28(a)-(c)
 
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-29 Technical Requirements – Roof Light Installation and Repair.
   (a)   Approved Roof Lights. A Taximeter Business can install Roof Lights
only in a Medallion Taxicab or Street Hail Livery. The Roof Lights must be of a
type or model approved by the Commission.
   (b)   Limitation on Use of Directional Appendages. A Taximeter Business must
install Roof Light directional appendages so that they can be used for
directional or emergency uses ONLY.
   (c)   Emergency or Trouble Lights. When an emergency or trouble light is
installed, the Taximeter Business must install only a type or model that has
been approved by the Commission and that complies with the Commission's
specifications.
   (d)   Emergency/Trouble Light Switch. When an emergency or trouble light is
installed, the Taximeter Business must install a switch that has no other
function than to operate the emergency or trouble light and that is not
connected to any other equipment.
   (e)   Interrelationship of Operation. The Taximeter Business must install
the Roof Light, the trouble light, the Taximeter, and the Rate Card/TLC Driver
License holder light so that the operation of any of these mechanisms is not
controlled or affected by the dashboard light dimmer switch or any other device
controlled by the Driver.
   (f)   Specifications for Switches and Wiring. The Taximeter Business must
only use switches and wiring that meet specifications of the Society of
Automotive Engineers, where such specifications are applicable.
   (g)   Unauthorized Switches, Wiring or Connections. The Taximeter Business
can only install switches for functions approved by the Commission. No
additional switches, wiring, or connections may be installed.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 fine for each subdivision Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-29(a)-(g) violated
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-30 Taximeter Manufacturers – Licensing and General Requirements.
   (a)   Approval Required. Before they are eligible for use in the State of
New York, all Taximeters must be approved by the New York Department of
Agriculture and Markets.
   (b)   Licensing of Taximeter Manufacturer. No Taximeter can be used in a
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery unless the manufacturer has a Valid Taximeter
Manufacturer's License.
   (c)   General Requirements. All Licensing Requirements (35 RCNY §
64-04 through 35 RCNY §
64-08), General Requirements (35 RCNY §
64-09 through
64-12) and Conduct requirements (35 RCNY §
64-33) will govern and apply to Taximeter Manufacturers in addition to the
specific requirements established in 35 RCNY §
64-31 and 35 RCNY §
64-32.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 64-31 Taximeter Manufacturers – Appointment of Manufacturer's Representative.
   (a)   A manufacturer required to be licensed by the Commission under this
chapter can appoint a Manufacturer's Representative to hold that License.
   (b)   A Taximeter Manufacturer that wishes to use a Manufacturer's
representative must appoint and authorize the Manufacturer's representative to
act on its behalf, in writing. The Taximeter Manufacturer will be bound by the
actions of the Manufacturer's Representative.
   (c)   In the event a Taximeter Manufacturer chooses to appoint a
Manufacturer's Representative to hold a License, the following provisions
apply:
      (1)   The Manufacturer's Representative must have the ability to fulfill
the requirements and obligations of a Taximeter Manufacturer under this chapter
and will be held jointly responsible with the Taximeter Manufacturer for
fulfilling these duties and responsibilities. The Taximeter Manufacturer's
appointment of a Manufacturer's Representative will not relieve it of
responsibility for compliance.
      (2)   The Taximeter Manufacturer must inform the Commission of the
appointment of a Manufacturer's Representative by providing a copy of the
appointment together with the name, address, and License numbers, if any, of
the Manufacturer's Representative, and must resubmit this information, as
updated, with every renewal application as long as the Manufacturer's
Representative's appointment continues.
      (3)   Each Manufacturer's Representative appointed under this subdivision
must apply to hold a License under this chapter and must meet all applicable
standards, criteria, and conditions of licensure. When a Manufacturer's
Representative applies for a License or its renewal, he or she must also
include in his or her application an acceptance of his or her appointment as
Manufacturer's Representative and of the responsibilities imposed on the
manufacturer by this chapter.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation if the Appearance REQUIRED
64-31(a)-(c) Taximeter Business License is suspended
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 64-32 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules.
   (a)   Acceptance of Gift or Gratuity. A Taximeter Licensee or any person
acting on his or her behalf must not accept any gift, gratuity, or thing of
value from an owner or driver of any vehicle licensed by the Commission or from
anyone acting on behalf of an owner or driver for the purpose of violating any
of these rules through acts of commission or omission.
   (b)   Reporting on Requests for Gift or Gratuity. A Taximeter Licensee, any
person acting on the business owner's behalf, or any of the Licensee's
employees must immediately report to the Commission and the NYC Department of
Investigation any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by
any employee, representative, or member of the Commission or by any public
servant.
   (c)   Offer of Gifts and Gratuities. A Taximeter Licensee or any person
acting on his or her behalf must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing
of value to any employee, representative, or member of the Commission or to any
other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Reporting on Offers of Gift or Gratuity. A Taximeter Licensee must
notify the Commission immediately by telephone and in writing within 24 hours
after receiving any offer of a gift or gratuity prohibited by 35 RCNY §
64-32(a).
   (e)   Fraud, Misrepresentation & Larceny. A Taximeter Licensee, while
performing his or her duties and responsibilities as a Taximeter Licensee, must
not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in concert with another, any act of
fraud, misrepresentation, or larceny. Examples of fraud, larceny, or
misrepresentation include, but are not limited to, calibration of a fare other
than that set by the Commission; adjustment of the tire size, driving axle,
transducer, wiring, or other equipment for the purpose of generating an
inaccurate signal of time or distance into the Taximeter or the Technology
System; the manufacture, sale or installation of any device that is either
designed to or does generate a false or inaccurate signal into the Taximeter or
the Technology System; or falsification of Technology System records.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(e)
 
   (f)   Willful Acts of Omission and Commission.
      (1)   Omission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to perform, alone or with
another, any act where this failure is against the best interests of the
public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
      (2)   Commission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform, alone or with another, any
act that is against the best interests of the public, although not specifically
mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(f)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Taximeter Licensee must notify the Commission in writing within
fifteen (15) days after any criminal conviction of the Licensee or any of the
Licensee's Business Entity Persons.
      (2)   Notification must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition of the conviction issued by
the clerk of the court.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(g)    30 days
 
   (h)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. A Taximeter Licensee must not threaten,
harass, or abuse any governmental or Commission representative, public servant,
or other person while performing his or her duties and responsibilities as a
Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(h)    30 days or revocation
 
         (i)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. A Taximeter Licensee must not
use or attempt to use any physical force against a Commission representative,
public servant, or other person while performing his or her duties and
responsibilities as a Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(i)    60 days or revocation
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Taximeter Licensee must
cooperate with all law enforcement officers and representatives of the
Commission at all times.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
64-32(j)
 
   (k)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission. A Taximeter Licensee must
answer and comply as directed with all questions, communications, notices,
directives, and summonses from the Commission or its representatives. A
Licensee must produce his or her Commission License and other documents
whenever the Commission requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
64-32(k)    compliance
 
   (l)   MTA Tax. A Taximeter Licensee must adjust the Taximeter in any Taxicab
or Street Hail Livery to add the MTA Tax to the fare. The MTA Tax must be
charged on any trip that starts in New York City and ends in any of:
      1.   New York City.
      2.   Dutchess County.
      3.   Nassau County.
      4.   Orange County.
      5.   Putnam County.
      6.   Rockland County.
      7.   Suffolk County.
      8.   Westchester County.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
Chapter 65: Sale of Taxicab Medallions
**** Subchapter A: Sale of New Medallions ****
§ 65-01 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   In accordance with Administrative Code § 19-532, the Chairperson will
issue and sell additional Taxicab Licenses up to the number authorized by state
and local law.
   (b)   This Subchapter establishes the process for issuing and selling newly
authorized Medallions.
§ 65-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they will be shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section will also
state whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (b)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
§ 65-03 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Bidder. An individual submitting a sealed bid for one or more Lots of
Taxicab Medallions or a Business Entity to which an individual Bidder assigns a
bid.
   (b)   Broker or Taxicab Broker. For purposes of this Subchapter, a Broker or
Taxicab Broker will include any person or entity, and any person or entity
which is an owner, shareholder, partner, member or employee of such person or
entity, that represents or advises any Bidder or potential Bidder in connection
with an actual or potential bid and meets either of the following criteria:
      (1)   Provides advice regarding bid price or potential bid price; or
      (2)   Obtains actual knowledge of the bid price submitted by any Bidder
while providing representation or advice.
   (c)   Closing Deadline. A Closing Deadline will be the date by which a
winning Bidder must close on any Lot as established in 35 RCNY §
65-07(a).
   (d)   Independent Medallion. A class of Medallion Taxicab License, the owner
of which may only own one Medallion.
   (e)   Lot. Medallions being sold in a single unit, which will be one
Medallion in the case of an Independent Medallion and two or more Medallions in
the case of Minifleet Medallions.
   (f)   Minifleet Medallion. A class of Medallion Taxicab License, the owner
of which must own at least two Minifleet Medallions.
   (g)   Reserve Status and Reserve Status Bids. The highest ten percent of the
non-winning bids in each category hold Reserve Status, unless the Chairperson
determines a greater number of non-winning bids will receive Reserve Status and
sets a higher qualifying percentage. A bid holding Reserve Status is a Reserve
Status Bid and is converted to a winning bid when a winning Bidder fails to
comply with the Closing Deadlines established in this Rule.
§ 65-04 General Provisions.
   (a)   Sale by Sealed Bid. The public sale of newly issued Taxicab Medallions
will be done by Sealed Bid.
   (b)   Classification of Medallions. Each Medallion will belong to only one
of the following classifications and will permanently remain in that
classification regardless of change in ownership of the Medallion after
issuance:
      (1)   Independent Medallion
      (2)   Minifleet Medallion
      (3)   Accessible Independent Medallion
      (4)   Accessible Minifleet Medallion
      (5)   Alternative Fuel Independent Medallion
      (6)   Alternative Fuel Minifleet Medallion.
   (c)   Sale in Lots. New Medallions will be sold in Lots.
   (d)   Ratios of Medallion Classifications. The ratio of Minifleet Medallions
to Independent Medallions (whether Restricted or Unrestricted) will be
maintained in accordance with § 19-504(i) of the Administrative Code.
   (e)   Separate Public Sales. Separate sales may be conducted for each of
Independent Medallions, Minifleet Medallions, Accessible Independent
Medallions, Accessible Minifleet Medallions, Alternative Fuel Independent
Medallions, and Alternative Fuel Minifleet Medallions.
§ 65-05 Commission Procedures for Holding a Sealed Bid Sale.
   (a)   Notice of the Sale. Sealed bid sales and any postponements of these
sales will be publicized as required below.
      (1)   Publication of Sealed Bid Sale. The Chairperson will publicize each
sealed bid sale by placing an announcement in the City Record for five
consecutive days, beginning at least thirty days prior to the deadline for
bidding. The announcement will include the following:
         (i)   The date and time on which bids are due;
         (ii)   The number of Medallions to be sold;
         (iii)   Whether those Medallions will be sold as Independent
Medallions, Minifleet Medallions, Accessible Independent Medallions, Accessible
Minifleet Medallions, Alternative Fuel Independent Medallions, or Alternative
Fuel Minifleet Medallions;
         (iv)   The numbers of Minifleet and Independent Medallions to be sold;
         (v)   The percentage of highest non-winning bids that will determine
the Reserve Status class for each type of Medallion to be sold; and
         (vi)   Other terms of sale.
      (2)   Publication of Postponements. The Chairperson has the ability to
postpone the public sale. The Chairperson will place an announcement of the
postponement in the City Record for five consecutive days, beginning at least
ten days prior to the new deadline for bidding.
      (3)   Additional Notices. The Chairperson can place additional notices in
the City Record or other publications.
   (b)   Pricing.
      (1)   The Chairperson will set a minimum upset price for Medallions to be
sold.
      (2)   The Chairperson will establish different upset prices for each type
of Medallion sold.
      (3)   A minimum upset price will be published in the City Record at least
ten days prior to the deadline for submission of bids.
      (4)   Any bid received that is less than that minimum will be rejected as
non-responsive.
   (c)   Bid Opening.
      (1)   The Chairperson will set a date when the bids will be opened in
public and the winning bids announced at the public sale.
      (2)   The winning bids will be the highest bids that are complete and
responsive as established in 35 RCNY §
65-06.
      (3)   The winning Bidders will be notified promptly by certified mail.
      (4)   Tie bids will be decided with a drawing, which will be held at the
bid opening. This process will also be used to determine tie bids that qualify
for Reserve Status.
      (5)   Winning bids will be published in the City Record and posted at the
Commission's office and on the Commission's website.
   (d)   Reserve Status Bids.
      (1)   The Chairperson will determine the number of the highest, non-
winning bids that will be given Reserve Status for each type of Medallion sold.
This number will not be less than ten percent of the total number of Medallions
of that type being sold.
      (2)   The holders of the highest non-winning bids that have been given
Reserve Status will be notified of their Reserve Status.
      (3)   Reserve Status may be converted to a winning bid if a winning
Bidder fails to comply with the Closing Deadlines established in this Rule.
      (4)   The Chairperson will notify the holder of a Reserve Status Bid when
that status changes to a winning bid. The date of notification will be the date
of the bid opening for purposes of calculating the holder's deadlines under
this Subchapter.
      (5)   The Chairperson will hold a drawing at the bid opening to determine
which bids will be given Reserve Status if there are more bids at the lowest
bid price qualifying for Reserve Status than set by the Chairperson.
      (6)   A winning Bidder for any Lot that fails to comply with the Closing
Deadline requirements will be disqualified from Reserve Status.
   (e)   Assignment of the Winning Bid.
      (1)   The rights of a winning Bidder can only be assigned prior to the
close of sale by a winning Bidder who is a Business Entity Person to a Business
Entity.
      (2)   The rights of a winning Bidder may not be assigned to any Business
Entity if any Business Entity Person of that Business Entity did not comply
with the Closing Deadline requirements associated with a winning bid on any
higher priced Lot.
§ 65-06 Procedures for Bidding.
   (a)   Submitting a Bid. Each Bidder must do the following:
      (1)   Submit bid on the form determined by the Chairperson.
      (2)   Submit only one bid for one Lot per envelope.
      (3)   Include with each bid the following:
         (i)   For each Minifleet Medallion for which a Bidder submits a bid, a
deposit of $5,000 (or $10,000 for each lot of 2 Minifleet Medallions) in a
certified check, bank check, money order, or a check issued by a Taxicab Broker
or Agent licensed by the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY
Chapter 62 or 35 RCNY
Chapter 63 respectively, payable to the "New York City Taxi and Limousine
Commission"
         (ii)   For each Independent Medallion for which a Bidder submits a
bid, a deposit of $2,000 in a certified check, bank check, money order, or a
check issued by a Taxicab Broker or Agent licensed by the Commission pursuant
to 35 RCNY
Chapter 62 or 35 RCNY
Chapter 63 respectively, payable to the "New York City Taxi and Limousine
Commission" and
         (iii)   A letter of commitment for no less than eighty percent of the
bid amount, issued by a bank or credit union licensed to do business in the
State of New York or other lender licensed by the State of New York or the
Federal Government.
      (4)   Submit bid in a 9" x 12" sealed envelope with a cover form
determined by the Chairperson on which the Bidder must indicate the following:
         (i)   The Bidder's name, address, phone number and date of sale; and
         (ii)   The type of Medallion Lot.
      (5)   Submit each sealed bid by hand delivery at the time and place
designated by the Chairperson.
      (6)   Submit each bid between 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on any of the four
business days immediately prior to the deadline for bidding.
   (b)   Late Bids. Any bid presented to the Commission after the deadline in
35 RCNY §
65-06(a)(6) will not be accepted.
   (c)   Required Certifications. As part of each bid form, the Bidder must
certify the following:
      (1)   The Bidder has not relied on any statements or representations from
the City of New York in determining the amount of the bid.
      (2)   The Bidder has not colluded, consulted, communicated, or agreed in
any way with any other Bidder or prospective Bidder for the purpose of
restricting competition or of inducing any other prospective Bidder to submit
or not to submit a bid for the purpose of restricting competition.
      (3)   The Bidder has not disclosed any bid price, directly or indirectly,
to any other Bidder for the purpose of restricting competition or of inducing
any other prospective Bidder to submit or not to submit a bid for the purpose
of restricting competition.
      (4)   The Bidder is not acting as a Taxicab Broker for any other Bidder
and is not the owner, shareholder, partner, member, or employee of any person
or entity acting as a Taxicab Broker for any other Bidder.
   (d)   Non-Responsive Bids. The following will be considered "non-responsive"
bids and will be rejected:
      (1)   Bids not rounded to the nearest one-cent increment.
      (2)   Bids not using the proper form or the proper envelope.
      (3)   Bids where the form or envelope cover form is not properly
completed, as determined by the Chairperson.
      (4)   Bid packages that do not have the proper deposit.
      (5)   Bid packages that do not contain a commitment letter meeting the
requirements of this section.
      (6)   Bid packages containing bids for more than one Lot per envelope.
      (7)   Bids that are non-responsive or non-conforming in any other
respect.
   (e)   All Bids Final. All bids are considered final and no Bidder will be
allowed to correct any bid after submission.
§ 65-07 Closing on the Purchase.
   (a)   Closing Deadlines.
      (1)   Within ninety days after the bid opening, each winning Bidder must
close on his or her Medallion(s). If the winning Bidder is unable to close
within that period, Bidder must complete the following no later than ninety
days after the bid opening:
         (i)   Deposit twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) in a form of
payment acceptable under 35 RCNY §
52-40(b)(2) for each Medallion covered by the winning bid; and
         (ii)   Provide the Chairperson with proof of purchase of a vehicle
eligible for Hack-Up (see 35 RCNY
Chapter 67) in the form of a certificate of origin, a certificate of title, a
bill of sale, or a signed sales contract.
      (2)   All purchases of Medallions must close by no later than ninety days
after bid opening unless extended by the Chairperson for reasonable cause
shown.
      (3)   All closing dates are subject to the approval of the Chairperson.
      (4)   No closing date can be scheduled until the winning Bidder has done
the following:
         (i)   Demonstrated compliance with all of the requirements for
issuance and ownership of a Taxicab License; and
         (ii)   Submitted proof of purchase of a vehicle eligible for Hack-Up
in the form of a certificate of origin, a certificate of title, a bill of sale,
or a signed sales contract.
      (5)   A winning Bidder's failure to comply with the provisions in this
subdivision will result in the disqualification of the winning bid.
   (b)   Additional Pre-Closing Requirements. Each winning Bidder must complete
the following prior to closing:
      (1)   Submit all documentation required by the Chairperson.
      (2)   Clear outstanding fines and penalties.
      (3)   Submit fingerprint records as directed by the Chairperson unless
the Bidder has electronic fingerprints already on file with the Commission.
   (c)   Post-Closing Requirement. Hack-Up each Medallion sold under this
Subchapter no later than the fifth business day following the day of the
closing on the sale of the Medallion, unless extended by the Chairperson for
reasonable cause shown.
   (d)   Payment. The winning Bidder will be responsible for payment of the
following:
      (1)   The balance of the purchase price (the bid amount, minus any
deposits);
      (2)   Any applicable taxes;
      (3)   Two years' worth of license and inspection fees (as provided in 35
RCNY §
58-07); and
      (4)   Any other fees due. No Medallion transfer tax will be collected for
the initial Medallion issuance.
   (e)   Disposition of Deposits. 
      (1)   All deposits of winning Bidders will be credited toward the sale
price.
      (2)   If the winning Bidder is not qualified to hold a license, the
deposit will be refunded.
      (3)   A winning Bidder who does not attempt to meet the requirements of
this Subchapter, including a winning Bidder who fails to comply with the
Closing Deadlines, will lose all deposits made under 35 RCNY §
65-06.
      (4)   Deposits of non-winning and non-responsive Bidders will be returned
by the Chairperson if possible.
         (i)   A deposit made under 35 RCNY §
65-06 that is not returnable to the Bidder will be deemed forfeited by the
Bidder and will be retained by the Commission after the Chairperson has made
two unsuccessful attempts to return the deposit, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the address listed by the Bidder on the bid form.
      (5)   Deposits submitted with bids that achieve Reserve Status will be
held until those bids are converted to winning bids or until the sales have
closed for all Lots of Medallions of the type for which the bid was made.
   (f)   Disqualification. 
      (1)   A winning Bidder's failure to meet the Closing Deadlines provided
in this section will result in the disqualification of that Bidder as to that
winning bid and the forfeiture of deposits made under 35 RCNY §
65-06 for that winning bid.
      (2)   A winning Bidder whose bid is disqualified due to Bidder's failure
to meet the Closing Deadlines established here will also be disqualified and
will have all deposits made under 35 RCNY §
65-06 forfeited with respect to any Reserve Status Bids that Bidder may have.
      (3)   A winning Bidder who has more than one winning bid or Reserve
Status Bid (including any bids assigned to a Business Entity in which that
Bidder is a Business Entity Person) must close first on his or her highest
winning bid and then in descending order of each next highest winning bid(s).
      (4)   A winning Bidder who has more than one winning bid or Reserve
Status Bid (including any bids assigned to a Business Entity in which that
Bidder is a Business Entity Person) may not avoid closing on the higher winning
bid(s) by failing to meet Closing Deadlines. In such a case, the winning Bidder
will be disqualified first on the lowest of his or her winning bids and then in
ascending order on each of the next lowest winning bids. The deposits made
under 35 RCNY §
65-06 for the disqualified bids will be forfeited.
(Amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016)
§ 65-08 Conflict of Interest Prohibitions.
   (a)   A Bidder cannot collude, consult, communicate, or agree in any way
with any other Bidder or prospective Bidder for the purpose of restricting
competition or inducing any other prospective Bidder to submit or not submit a
bid for the purpose of restricting competition. A Bidder cannot disclose any
bid price, directly or indirectly, to any other Bidder for the purpose of
restricting competition or inducing any other prospective Bidder to submit or
not submit a bid for the purpose of restricting competition. In addition to any
other penalties provided by law, violation of this subdivision or submission of
a false certification under 35 RCNY §
65-06 will result in the disqualification of all bids submitted by that Bidder.

 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and either
65-08(a)    disqualification of bid or, if sale has closed, Appearance REQUIRED
            revocation of Taxicab License(s)
 
   (b)   A Taxicab Broker cannot submit a bid to purchase any Lot if that
broker is acting as a Taxicab Broker for any Bidder. This prohibition also
applies to any Business Entity Person or employee of a Taxicab Broker.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and either
65-08(b)    disqualification of bid or, if sale has closed, Appearance REQUIRED
            revocation of Taxicab License(s)
 
**** Subchapter B: Sale of Reissued Medallions ****
§ 65-11 Scope of this Subchapter.
This Subchapter establishes the procedures for the Commission to reissue
Taxicab Medallions that have been revoked where the owners of such revoked
Medallions did not provide for the resale of the Medallions.
§ 65-12 Penalties.
This Subchapter is informational in nature and does not contain any penalties.
§ 65-13 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
Reissued Medallions are Medallions that meet the following criteria:
   (a)   The original owner's Medallion Taxicab License has been revoked;
   (b)   The original owner failed to sell or otherwise legally dispose of the
Medallion; and
   (c)   The Medallion was repossessed by the Commission and subsequently re-
issued for sale to a new owner.
§ 65-14 General Provisions.
   (a)   Re-Issuing Medallions. Any Taxicab Medallion that has been revoked by
the Commission and not sold by the Owner prior to revocation may be repossessed
by the Commission and reissued and sold by the Commission.
   (b)   Sale by Public Auction. The sale of reissued Medallions will be done
by public auction.
§ 65-15 Commission Requirements for Conducting the Public Auction.
   (a)   Licensed Auctioneer. The public auction will be conducted by a
licensed auctioneer.
   (b)   Notice. The auction sale will be advertised in the City Record for at
least twenty days before the auction. At his or her discretion, the Chairperson
can also advertise the auction in newspapers and other media.
   (c)   Maintenance of Medallion Classification. The classification of
Medallions issued under this Subchapter will not change regardless of change in
ownership of the Medallion after issuance.
   (d)   Sale of Minifleet Medallions.
      (1)   A Minifleet Medallion can be issued only to a corporation that owns
at least one other Minifleet Medallion. The purchase at auction of two
Minifleet Medallions will satisfy that requirement.
      (2)   If more than one Minifleet Medallion is being auctioned, the
Medallions will be auctioned first as a pair and then separately. The final
sale of the Medallions will be in the manner (as a pair or separately) that
will bring the highest return to the City.
§ 65-16 Chairperson's Authority to Modify Auction Procedures.
   (a)   Cancellation. The Chairperson can, at any time and for any reason,
postpone or cancel an auction.
   (b)   Modification. The Chairperson may modify the bidding or closing
procedures established below provided that a public notice in the City Record
is made in advance of the auction.
   (c)   Delegation and Discretion. The Chairperson may take further measures
as may be appropriate to the sale of the medallions.
§ 65-17 Bidding Requirements and Procedures.
   (a)   Bidder Criteria. Any person can bid. However, the highest Bidder must
satisfy all criteria for Taxicab License owners. The Chairperson will review
the application for a license by the highest bidder to determine if that bidder
satisfies the ownership criteria.
   (b)   Application for Medallion License. The highest bidder must file an
application for a Taxicab License with the Commission within three weeks from
the auction date, unless the Chairperson extends the deadline for good cause.
   (c)   Denial of Application.
      (1)   If the highest bidder's application for a license is denied for any
reason, the second-highest bidder will be awarded the sale on condition that
the second-highest bidder's application for a Taxicab License is approved by
the Chairperson.
      (2)   If neither the highest bidder's nor the second-highest bidder's
application for a license is approved, the auction will be nullified.
§ 65-18 Closing Requirements and Procedures.
   (a)   Deposit. Immediately after the close of bids, the highest Bidder must
provide a deposit to the auctioneer covering a percentage of the high bid as
set in advance by the Chairperson. The deposit must be in the form of a
certified check, a money order, or such other form as set in advance by the
Chairperson and published in the City Record.
   (b)   Other Payments Due. In addition to the amount bid, the highest Bidder
will be responsible on the transfer closing date for any sales tax, Medallion
transfer tax, or other applicable taxes or fees.
   (c)   Stay of Closing. The outcome of an auction remains conditional pending
the resolution of any challenge to the Commission's legal authority to issue
and auction the Medallion.
Chapter 66: Licensing and Rules for Technology System Providers
§ 66-01 Scope of the Chapter.
   (a)   To establish a formal procedure for the licensing and supervision of
businesses that sell, lease, make available for use, install, service, and
repair Technology Systems.
   (b)   To establish technical requirements for Technology Systems and provide
for the issuance of licenses to Technology System Providers whose systems meet
such requirements.
   (c)   To establish services to be provided by Technology System Providers.
   (d)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these rules.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity. 
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License from the
Commission for the Technology System.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
35 RCNY §
66-08 and can result in License suspension, revocation, and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they will be shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section will also
state whether the violator must attend the Hearing. 
   (c)   Payment of Fines. 
      (1)   Fines are due within thirty (30) days of the day the Respondent is
found guilty of the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
OATH Hearings Division within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Non-renewal of License; Suspension; Revocation. 
      (1)   Non-renewal of License. 
         (i)   If a Technology System Provider License is not timely renewed,
the Technology System Provider must immediately notify:
            (A)   the Commission of the date of License expiration; and
            (B)   each Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee who is using the
Technology System approved under the expired License that the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee has ninety (90) days from the date of License expiration
to obtain a Technology System and related services from another Technology
System Provider.
         (ii)   Upon expiration of the Technology System Provider License, the
Technology System Provider must not enter into any new contracts with Licensees
for sale, lease or use of the Technology System approved under the expired
License, and must not renew existing contracts with Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensees who are using the Technology System approved under the expired
License.
         (iii)   Upon expiration of the Technology System Provider License, the
Technology System Provider must continue to provide to each such Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensee all services required by this Chapter, including
but not limited to Maintenance Service, and will be subject to all monetary
fines that apply as if its Technology System Provider License were not expired
for ninety (90) days after License expiration or until all such Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensees have obtained Technology Systems and related
services from other Technology System Providers, whichever is earlier.
         (iv)   A Technology System Provider whose License has expired must
provide to each Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee who used the Technology
System approved under the expired License the following:
            (A)   De-installation of the Technology System at no charge; and
            (B)   If the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee purchased the
Technology System for ownership, a refund of the purchase price of the
Technology System based on the net book value of such Technology System,
applying straight line depreciation by using the purchase price as the cost
basis and assuming a sixty (60) month useful life with no salvage value.
      (2)   Suspension. 
         (i)   If a Technology System Provider's License has been suspended by
the Commission for a period of at least thirty (30) days, the Technology System
Provider must immediately notify each Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee
who is using the Technology System approved under the suspended License:
            (A)   the dates during which the License is suspended,
            (B)   that the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee has the
option to terminate its contract with the Technology System Provider Licensee
by providing written notice to the Technology System Provider, or if its
contract will expire during the period of suspension that the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee has the option not to renew its contract, and,
            (C)   that the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee, if it wishes
to terminate or not to renew its contract with the Technology System Provider
whose License has been suspended, has ninety (90) days from the end date of the
suspension period to obtain a Technology System and related services from
another Technology System Provider.
         (ii)   While the Technology System Provider's License is suspended,
the Provider must not enter into any new contracts with Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensees for sale, lease or use of the Technology System approved under
the suspended License, but may renew, at the option of the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee, existing contracts with Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensees who are using the Technology System approved under the suspended
License.
         (iii)   While the Technology System Provider's License is suspended,
the Technology System Provider must continue to provide to such Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensees all services required by this Chapter, including
but not limited to Maintenance Service, and will be subject to all monetary
fines that apply as if its Technology System Provider License were not
suspended. If a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee opts to terminate its
contract with the Technology System Provider or to not renew its contract while
the Technology System Provider License is suspended, the Technology System
Provider must provide such services for:
            (A)   ninety (90) days after the end date of the suspension period,
or
            (B)   until all such Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensees have
obtained Technology Systems and related services from other Technology System
Providers,
            whichever is earlier.
      (3)   Revocation. 
         (i)   If a Technology System Provider's License has been revoked by
the Commission, the Technology System Provider must immediately notify each
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee who is using the Technology System
approved under the revoked License that:
            (A)   its contract with the Technology System Provider will be
deemed terminated ninety (90) days following the date of License revocation, or
            (B)   may be terminated earlier by the Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensee by giving written notice of termination, and,
            (C)   that the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee has up to
ninety (90) days from the date of License revocation to obtain a Technology
System and related services from another Technology System Provider.
         (ii)   Upon revocation of the Technology System Provider's License,
the Provider must not:
            (A)   enter into any new contracts with Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensees for sale, lease or use of the Technology System approved under
the revoked License, or
            (B)   renew existing contracts with Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensees who are using the Technology System approved under the revoked
License.
         (iii)   Upon revocation of the Technology System Provider License, if
the Technology System approved under the revoked License is functioning
properly, the Technology System Provider must continue to provide to such
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensees all services required by this Chapter,
including but not limited to Maintenance Service, and will be subject to all
monetary fines that apply as if their Technology Provider License were not
revoked, for:
            (A)   ninety (90) days after License revocation, or
            (B)   until all such Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensees have
obtained Technology Systems and related services from other Technology System
Providers,
            whichever is earlier.
         (iv)   If the Technology System is not functioning properly, the
Technology System Provider must cease its operations with respect to such
Technology System.
         (v)   A Technology System Provider whose License has been revoked must
provide de-installation at no charge to each Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensee who used the Technology System approved under the revoked License.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
66-02(d)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 66-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal Technology System Provider License.
   (b)   Credit, Debit, and Prepaid Card Services means the portion of the
Technology System used to process Passenger payment of fare in a Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery by credit, debit, or prepaid card as described in 35 RCNY §
66-24(a).
   (c)   License. When the term "License" is used by itself in this Chapter –
and in this Chapter ONLY – it refers to a Technology System Provider License.
   (d)   Licensee. When the term "Licensee" is used by itself, in this Chapter
– and in this Chapter ONLY– it refers to a Technology System Provider Licensee.
   (e)   Maintenance Service means all of the services required to be provided
by the Technology System Provider pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-18.
   (f)   Modification of Technology System means any modification to the
Technology System or related services after the Commission has issued a License
for such Technology System that would materially alter the functionality,
performance characteristics, security measures, or technical environment of the
Technology System or related services. A Modification of Technology System
excludes:
      (1)   fixes and/or maintenance patches necessary to conform the
Technology System or any of its components or related services to the
requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-24; and
      (2)   security patches to the extent such fixes or patches are necessary
in the Technology System Provider's good faith judgment to maintain the
continuity of the Technology System or related services or to correct an event
or occurrence that would, if uncorrected, substantially prevent, hinder or
delay proper operation of the Technology System or related services.
   (g)   Logged On Hail Exclusionary Zone Positioning means the date, time and
geographic position of a logged on Street Hail Livery (with or without
Passengers) upon the point of entering and leaving the Hail Exclusionary Zone,
and at each point in the vehicle's route within the Hail Exclusionary Zone in
near real time at an interval no less frequent than every thirty (30) seconds.
   (h)   Logged On Location Positioning. The date, time and geographic position
of a logged on Taxicab or Street Hail Livery (with Passengers) at the
commencement and end of each Passenger fare, and (with or without Passengers or
logged on but unavailable for street-hail described in 35 RCNY §
 66-24(b)(1)) at each point in the vehicle's route in near real time at an
interval no less frequent than every thirty (30) seconds.
   (i)   PCI Standards. The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards
issued by the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council as they may
change from time to time. Seewww.pcisecuritystandards.org.
   (j)   Personal Information. Any information that can specifically identify
an individual, such as name, address, social security number, unmasked or non-
truncated credit, debit, or prepaid card numbers, together with any other
information that relates to an individual who has been so identified, and any
other information that is otherwise subject to privacy or confidentiality laws
and associated rules and regulations. The display or disclosure of only the
last four digits of a credit, debit, or prepaid card number is not Personal
Information. The name of a Driver and the Driver's Commission license number is
not Personal Information.
   (k)   Technical Standards means performance-based or design-specific
technical specifications and related management systems practices.
   (l)   TLC Driver License means the authority granted by the Commission to an
individual to drive a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery in the
City of New York.
   (m)   24 x 7 x 365 Basis means a level of effort provided by the Technology
System Provider that makes the applicable service relating to the Technology
System available 24 hours per day, 7 days per week, 365 days per year without
regard to local, national, international holidays or other events.
   (n)   Update means all revisions, updates, modifications, corrections,
releases, versions, fixes and enhancements to Software or Hardware that is a
component of the Technology System. 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 66-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Licensees. An Applicant for a Technology System Provider License or
its renewal may be an individual or a Business Entity. 
   (b)   Approval for Each Technology System. Each Technology System offered
under a Technology System Provider's License must be approved by the
Chairperson prior to making it available for sale, lease, or use by Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensees. A Technology System intended for use in Street
Hail Liveries, pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-24(h), must be approved for use by the Chairperson separately and apart from
a Technology System intended for use in Taxicabs. 
   (c)   Certification. Any new or renewal application for a Technology System
Provider License must be filed on a form approved by the Chairperson. The
Applicant must swear (or affirm) that the information in the Application is
true, under penalty of perjury. 
   (d)   Proof of Identity. The individual or Business Entity Person submitting
the application for a Technology System Provider License must provide to the
Commission: 
      (1)   A valid form of photo identification issued by the United States, a
state or territory, or any political subdivision of a state or territory
      (2)   A valid social security number
   (e)   Age. The individual or Business Entity Person applying for a
Technology System Provider License or its renewal must be at least 18 years of
age. 
   (f)   Fit to Hold a License. The individual or Business Entity Person
applying for a Technology System Provider License or its renewal must
demonstrate that they are Fit to Hold a License. 
   (g)   Partnership Filings. When the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with its License application a certified copy of the partnership certificate
from the clerk of the county where the principal place of business is located.
In addition, each partner must satisfy the requirements of identity and age, as
specified in subdivisions (d) and (e), above. 
   (h)   Corporate or LLC Filings. When the Applicant is a corporation, it must
file with its License application all of the following: 
      (1)   One of the following certificates:
         (i)   A certified copy(ies) of its certificate(s) of incorporation
with a filing receipt issued by the secretary of state(s) in which the
Applicant is incorporated if the Applicant was incorporated less than one year
from the date of the License application
         (ii)   A certificate of good standing if the Applicant was
incorporated more than one year from the date of the License application
         (iii)   A copy of the certificate of incorporation, filing receipt,
and authority to do business within the State of New York if the Applicant is
an out-of-state corporation
      (2)   A list of its officers and shareholders that own at least a 10%
share of the company, including names, residence addresses, telephone numbers,
and percentage of ownership interest of each such shareholder
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). When the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application all of the following:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (ii)   A list of the members who have at least a 10% ownership stake
in the LLC, with the percentages of the Applicant owned by each.
   (i)   Uniqueness of Name. The Commission has the right to reject the
proposed name of any Technology System Provider that the Commission finds to be
substantially similar to any name in use by another Technology System Provider
Licensee. 
   (j)   Payment of Fines and Fees. 
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Consumer Affairs,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau, and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (k)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address as required by 35 RCNY §
66-13. 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-05 Licensing – Specific Requirements.
   (a)   Approval for New License. The Commission will not issue a Technology
System Provider License to any Applicant unless the Commission approves the
Technology System proposed for sale, lease or use by the Applicant. In
determining whether to approve the Technology System, the Commission will
consider, in its sole discretion, whether the documentation required to be
submitted by the Applicant pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-05(b) below adequately demonstrates that the Technology System complies with
all of the requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-24, or as such requirements may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (g) of this section. 
   (b)   Documentation for Technology System Approval. The Applicant must
submit with its License application the following documentation for each
Technology System for which Commission approval is sought. All documentation
pertaining to an independent third party must be accompanied by a signed
authorization from the Applicant authorizing the Commission to contact the
independent third party directly and authorizing the independent third party to
respond to inquiries from the Commission regarding the Application. 
      (1)   Documentation, to be renewed and resubmitted to the TLC every
twelve (12) months, demonstrating that an independent third party that is a
Qualified Security Assessor ("QSA") company, has performed security testing of
the Technology System and related services to determine compliance with the
security standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-24(i)(1), or as such standards may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (g) of this section, and the successful results of the
security testing;
      (2)   Documentation, to be renewed and resubmitted to the TLC every
twelve (12) months, demonstrating that an independent third party that is a QSA
company has performed security testing of the Technology System and related
services to determine compliance with the security standards set forth in 35
RCNY §
66-24(i)(3) and (4), or as such standards may be waived or modified by the
Commission pursuant to subdivision (g) of this section, and the successful
results of the security testing;
      (3)   Documentation, to be renewed and resubmitted to the TLC every
twelve (12) months, issued by EMVCo demonstrating that the Technology System is
compliant with the security standards set for in 35 RCNY §
66-24(i)(2), or as such standards may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (g) of this section, and the successful results of the
security testing; and
      (4)   A detailed system design document, functional system description,
and a procedures manual / user guide that describes the features and operations
of the Technology System.
      (5)   Demonstration Models.
         (i)   One working demonstration model of the Technology System
integrated with a Taximeter, inclusive of all components required for complete
functionality of the Technology System.
         (ii)   A second demonstration model installed into a vehicle for
demonstration purposes and to allow approval by the Commission of the
installation method and location of the Technology System. In its decision to
approve the location and installation of the Technology System, the TLC will
consider the safety of the Passenger, Passenger ergonomics, the impact of
modifications on the proper functioning of the vehicle or other required
taxicab equipment, and any comments provided by Technology System Providers and
industry, passenger, or safety organizations.
      (6)   Technology System Training. Applicants must provide to the
personnel of the Commission or its designee, at no cost to the Commission,
training sessions on the functionality of the Technology System.
   (c)   Modification of Technology System. If after the Technology System
Provider License is issued pursuant to this Chapter, the Technology System
Provider wants to implement a Modification of the Technology System, the
Licensee must submit an application for approval of a Modification of the
Technology System, including all documentation required by subdivision (b) of
this section. 
   (d)   Technology System Approval Upon Renewal. If upon renewal of the
Technology System Provider License, 
      (1)   the Licensee seeks approval of a Modification of the Technology
System, the Licensee must meet all of the requirements applicable to a
Modification of the Technology System pursuant to subdivision (c) of this
section; or
      (2)   the Licensee does not seek approval of a Modification of the
Technology System and there has been no Modification of the Technology System
since the prior Commission approval of the License or prior Commission approval
of a Modification of the Technology System, the Licensee must submit to the
Commission a certification to that effect and also certify that all prior
certifications by independent third parties submitted to the Commission are
still valid.
   (e)   Required Insurance. After submission of an application for a new
Technology System Provider License, an Applicant must certify that it
maintains, and provide to the Commission proof upon demand, the insurance
required in this subdivision. Upon submission of an application to renew a
Technology System Provider License, the Licensee must certify that the Licensee
maintains the following insurance: 
      (1)   Workers' Compensation, Disability Benefits, and Employer's
Liability Insurance. The Applicant must maintain, and ensure that its
subcontractor(s) who is/are performing or will perform services in connection
with any of the activities licensed under this Chapter maintain, Workers'
Compensation Insurance, Disability Benefits Insurance, and Employer's Liability
Insurance in accordance with the laws of the State of New York on behalf of, or
with regard to, all employees performing services to the Applicant in
connection with any of the activities licensed under this Chapter. This
paragraph does not apply to Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Drivers, or to
individuals or business entities employed by any Technology System Provider or
its subcontractor(s) who under applicable law are deemed to be independent
contractors and not employees. 
      (2)   Unemployment Insurance. To the extent required by law, the
Applicant must provide Unemployment Insurance for its employees. 
      (3)   Proof of Insurance Upon Request. 
         (i)   For Workers' Compensation Insurance, Disability Benefits
Insurance, and Employer's Liability Insurance, the Applicant must possess one
of the following:
            (A)   C-105.2 Certificate of Workers' Compensation Insurance;
            (B)   U-26.3 – State Insurance Fund Certificate of Workers'
Compensation Insurance;
            (C)   Request for WC/DB Exemption (Form CE-200);
            (D)   Equivalent or successor forms to any or all of the forms
above used by the New York State Workers' Compensation Board; or
            (E)   Other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Commission
         (ii)   For Disability Benefits Insurance, the Applicant must possess
one of the following:
            (A)   DB-120.1 Certificate of Insurance Coverage under the NYS
Disability Benefits Law;
            (B)   Request for WC/DB Exemption (Form CE-200)
            (C)   Equivalent of successor forms to any of all of the forms
above used by the New York State Workers' Compensation Board; or
            (D)   Other proof of insurance in a form acceptable to the
Commission.
      (4)   The Applicant must provide the Commission with a copy of any policy
required under this subdivision upon demand by the Commission or the New York
City Law Department.
      (5)   If the Licensee receives notice that any insurance policy required
under this subdivision will expire, be cancelled, or terminated for any reason,
the Applicant must immediately forward a copy of the notice to the Commission
and the New York City Comptroller.
   (f)   Waivers or Modifications. Except where expressly prohibited by law,
the Commission may, in its discretion, waive or modify any requirements for
licensing under this Chapter in the interests of public safety and convenience.
Requests for waivers or modifications must be submitted in writing to the
Commission. 
   (g)   Information Security and Use of Personal Information Policy. The
Applicant must submit with its License application an information security and
use of personal information policy that includes, at a minimum, the following
information: 
      (1)   a statement of internal access policies relating to passenger and
driver Personal Information for employees, contractors, and third parties, if
applicable;
      (2)   a statement that, except to the extent necessary to provide credit,
debit, and prepaid card services and services for any application that provides
for electronic payment, Personal Information will only be collected and used
with such passenger's affirmative express consent and that such personal
information will not be used, shared, or disclosed, except for lawful purposes;
      (3)   procedures for notifying the Commission and affected parties of any
breach of the security of the system, pursuant to section 899-aa of the General
Business Law;
      (4)   a statement that any credit, debit, or prepaid card information
collected by the Applicant or a credit, debit, or prepaid card services
provider is processed by the Applicant or such provider in compliance with
applicable payment card industry standards, and
      (5)   a statement of the Applicant's policies regarding the use of
passenger geolocation information, which must include, at a minimum, a
prohibition on the use, monitoring, or disclosure of trip information,
including the date, time, pick-up location, drop-off location, and real-time
vehicle location and any retained vehicle location records, without such
passenger's affirmative express consent.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-06 Licensing – Fees and Term of License.
   (a)   Annual Fee. Every application for a new or renewal Technology System
Provider License must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of
$500 for each License to be issued or renewed for the term as provided in
subdivision (e) of this section. If the License term is for less than six
months, the fee will be prorated. 
   (b)   Form of Payment. All application fees must be paid by credit card,
money order, or certified check. 
   (c)   License Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed License is $25. 
   (d)   Late Filing Fee. If the Commission allows a late filing for a renewal
application, there will be an additional late filing fee of $25. 
   (e)   Term of License. The term of a Technology System Provider License will
be one year or less and each License will expire on October 31st. 
   (f)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least
sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   If an application for renewal of a License has been made prior to
the expiration date of the License, the Chairperson will extend the
effectiveness of the License until review of the renewal application is
completed. The effectiveness of the License during this extended period applies
even if the application is ultimately denied. If an extended License renewal
application is approved, the renewal License expiration date will be based on
the original expiration date of the License and not the extended date.
      (3)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 90 days
after the expiration date as a "late application," if the Applicant pays a late
fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired until the application for renewal is approved by the Commission.
      (4)   The postmark date is the date of filing for an application that is
filed by mail. The date of submission is the date of filing for an application
that is filed in person.
   (g)   Suspended Licenses. If a License is suspended and it is also due to be
renewed, the Licensee must apply for renewal as required in subdivision (f)
above if the Licensee wants to renew the License. Failure to complete the
renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed. 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-07 Licensing – Cause for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Continuously Comply. Whenever the Commission determines
that the Technology System Provider Licensee no longer meets the requirements
for the License, the Commission may suspend or revoke the License and deny any
application for renewal. 
   (b)   Summary Suspension. Nothing in this section limits the authority of
the Commission to summarily suspend any Technology System Provider License when
a threat to public health, safety, or welfare exists. 
   (c)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements. 
      (1)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
ninety (90) days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application by the
expiration date of the current License.
   (d)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial of the
application. 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-08 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity.
Technology System Provider License Required. An individual or Business Entity
must not sell, lease, make available for use, install, maintain, service or
repair a Technology System in any Taxicab or Street Hail Livery, or enter into
or renew a contract with a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee for the sale,
lease, use, installation, maintenance, service or repair of an System without a
Valid Technology System Provider License. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
66-08
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-09 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law.
   (a)   Licenses and Permits. A Technology System Provider Licensee must
obtain licenses and permits required by applicable local, state or federal
law. 
   (b)   Occupational Safety and Health Administration. A Technology System
Provider Licensee must comply with all applicable Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) standards and requirements at the Licensee's place
of business, as well as all other federal, state, and local laws governing its
business. 
   (c)   Payment of All Fines and Fees. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must pay all fines, fees, and taxes it owes to any federal, state, or local
governmental jurisdiction when they are due. 
   (d)   Workers' Compensation Laws. A Technology System Provider Licensee must
comply with all laws regarding workers' compensation and disability benefits,
as well as all federal laws regarding the withholding of taxes and payment of
FICA and other withholding taxes. 
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-09(a)-(d) until compliance
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-10 General Requirements – Indemnification.
   (a)   General Indemnification. A Technology System Provider Licensee must
defend, indemnify and hold the City, its officers and employees harmless from
any and all third-party claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are
without merit) or judgments for damages on account of any injuries or death to
any person or damage to any property and from costs and expenses (including
reasonable attorneys' fees) to which the City, its officers and employees may
be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly arising out of any
operations of the Technology System Provider Licensee and/or its employees,
agents or subcontractors in connection with any of the activities licensed
under this Chapter to the extent resulting from any negligent act of commission
or omission, any intentional tortious act, or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter. Insofar as the facts or law relating to any third-
party claim would preclude the City from being completely indemnified by the
Technology System Provider Licensee, the City shall be partially indemnified by
the Technology System Provider Licensee to the fullest extent permitted by
law. 
   (b)   Infringement Indemnification. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all third-party
claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are without merit) or judgments
for damages and from costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees)
to which the City may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly
arising out of or in connection with any infringement by the Technology System
Provider Licensee, its agents or subcontractors of any copyright, trade
secrets, trademark or patent rights or any other property or personal right of
any third party in the conduct of the licensed activities. Insofar as the facts
or law relating to any third-party claim would preclude the City from being
completely indemnified by the Technology System Provider Licensee, the City
shall be partially indemnified by the Technology System Provider Licensee to
the fullest extent permitted by law. 
   (c)   Not Limited by Insurance. The indemnification obligations set forth in
this section shall not be limited in any way by the Technology System Provider
Licensee's obligations to obtain and maintain insurance as provided in 35 RCNY
§
66-05(e). 
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-10(a)-(b) until compliance
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-11 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited.
   (a)   A Technology System Provider Licensee must not use or permit any other
person to use its business premises or office of record for any unlawful
purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-11(a)    up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (b)   A Technology System Provider Licensee must not conceal any evidence of
a crime connected with its business premises or office of record.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-11(b)    up to 30 days or revocation
 
   (c)   A Technology System Provider Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission and the police any attempt to use its business premises to commit a
crime.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $100 - $350 fine and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
66-11(c)    to 30 days
 
   (d)   A Technology System Provider Licensee must not file with the
Commission any statement that it knows or reasonably should know to be false,
misleading, deceptive, or materially incomplete.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
66-11 (d)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-12 General Requirements – Notice to TLC.
   (a)   Material Change in Information. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must notify the Commission of any material change in the information contained
in its current Technology System Provider License application or renewal. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-12(a)    up to 30 days
 
   (b)   Suspension or Revocation of License. A Technology System Provider
Licensee must immediately notify the Commission in writing of any suspension or
revocation of any license granted to the Licensee, or any other person acting
on its behalf, by any agency of the City or State of New York, or the
government of the United States. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-12(b)    until compliance
 
   (c)   Security Breach. A Technology System Provider Licensee must inform the
Commission if it is required to make disclosures under State or Federal law
regarding security breaches, including the New York State Information Security
Breach and Notification Act (General Business Law § 899-aa). 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
66-12(c)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-13 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address.
   (a)   Each Technology System Provider must designate and provide to the
Commission the street address of its primary Technology System Provider
location as its Mailing Address.
   (b)   A Technology System Provider must have and provide to the Commission a
working Email Address and telephone number at all times.
   (c)   A Technology System Provider must report any change of Mailing
Address, Email Address and telephone number to the Commission in person or by
mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-13(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address provided by the Technology System Provider.
   (e)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Technology System Provider.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-14 Business Requirements – Change in Business Ownership or Application
Information.
   (a)   Approval for Transfer of Ownership. A Technology System Provider
Licensee must not make any change in the officers, directors, members, partners
or general partners or transfer any ownership interest in the Technology System
Provider, if such transfer would result in a new principal shareholder, without
the prior consent of the Commission. This prohibition includes the transfer of
any ownership interest and any agreement to transfer an ownership interest in
the future. 
 
            Penalty: $1,000 - $5,000 fine and suspension
35 RCNY §  until consent of Commission is obtained or    Appearance REQUIRED
66-14(a)    change in business ownership is withdrawn, or
            revocation
 
   (b)   Approval for Change to Application Information. A Technology System
Provider Licensee must obtain the Commission's approval before making any
change in the location of its business premises where it interacts with
customers, the location of its facility where installation and/or repairs of
Systems are performed, mailing address, corporate name, trade name, or any
other material deviation from the description of the Technology System Provider
as stated in the original or renewal application. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine Appearance REQUIRED
66-14(b)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-15 Business Requirements – Fees Charged by Licensees.
   (a)   Filing of Fee Schedule with TLC. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must file with the Commission a current schedule of maximum fees for: 
      (1)   Services related to the sale, lease, use, installation,
maintenance, service and repair of the Technology System approved under this
Chapter;
      (2)   Credit, debit, and prepaid card processing charges imposed by the
Technology System Provider and by the credit/debit/prepaid card services
provider;
      (3)   Training provided by the Technology System Provider over and above
the training required by 35 RCNY §
66-16(c);
      (4)   Late payment charges, if any, for invoiced amounts that are not
paid by the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee on or before thirty (30)
days from the due date;
      (5)   De-installation of a Technology System, not to exceed $125 when de-
installation is performed by the TSP;
         (i)   TSP may not charge a de-installation fee when the Technology
System is de-installed by another party.
      (6)   Unreturned or damaged equipment fees;
      (7)   Moving a Technology System from one vehicle to another;
      (8)   Termination/Cancellation of Technology System contract; and
      (9)   Any and all other fees.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: First Violation: $1,000 fine      Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-15(a)    Second Violation: $1,000 and/or suspension
 
   (b)   Filing of Fee Changes with TLC. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must file any change in fees with the Commission at least ten (10) days before
the fees are scheduled to change. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: First Violation: $1,000 fine      Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-15(b)    Second Violation: $1,000 and/or suspension
 
   (c)   Credit Card Processing Fees. Any fees withheld by the Technology
System Provider for processing the credit/debit/prepaid card transaction
however processed, including by any E-Hail Application that provides for E-
Payment, or Digital Wallet Application must not exceed three point seven five
percent (3.75%) of the total amount processed in connection with such
transaction. Note: This rule is applicable only for any and all contracts
entered into after October 1, 2019. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: First Violation: $1,000 fine      Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-15(c)    Second Violation: $1,000 and/or suspension
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 66-16 Business Requirements – Sale, Lease or Use of Technology System.
All of the following conditions apply with regard to a Technology System
Provider's sale, lease, making available for use, and installation of a
Technology System for use in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery:
   (a)   The Technology System Provider must not sell, lease, make available
for use, or install a Technology System for use in a Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery unless the Technology System has been approved by the Commission
pursuant to this Chapter and the Technology System installed in the Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery is identical to the Technology System that was approved;
   (b)   Prior to the sale, lease, making available for use, or installation of
a Technology System, a Technology System Provider must present to the Taxicab
or Street Hail Livery Licensee a contract for execution by the Technology
System Provider and the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee that meets the
requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
66-17;
   (c)   Prior to installation of a Technology System, or prior to making a
Technology System operational, the Technology System Provider must offer to the
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee or an Authorized Representative, at no
additional charge, at least one training session on the proper use and
operation of the Technology System. The content of the training shall be
sufficient to enable the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee and Driver(s)
to properly operate the technology system.
   (d)   Upon written request by an Agent in contract with the Technology
System Provider, and within fourteen (14) days of such written request and at
no additional charge to the Agent, a Technology System Provider must provide
in-person training and written instructions on how to properly de-install the
Provider's Technology System. A Technology System Provider may not prohibit a
trained Agent from de-installing the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension
66-16(a)-(d) up to 60 days or revocation for each          Appearance REQUIRED
             subdivision violated
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 66-17 Business Requirements – Contract with Taxicab Owner or Street Hail
Livery Licensee.
The contract between the Technology System Provider and the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee for the sale, lease, or use of a Technology System must
contain provisions specifying that:
   (a)   The Technology System Provider agrees to provide the Medallion or
Street Hail Livery Owner monthly invoices with all costs itemized.
   (b)   Each party agrees that any limitation of liability in the contract
shall not apply to any and all damages, fines, penalties, deficiencies, losses,
liabilities, and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising from
direct claims between the parties based on damage to real or tangible personal
property, death or bodily injury caused by the negligent or willful conduct of
a party.
   (c)   The term of the contract may be for periods of time up to five (5)
years including renewals, but such contract renewals shall be subject to the
renewal of the Technology System Provider's License.
      (1)   The fees provided for in the contract may not be raised during the
term of the contract unless both parties agree.
      (2)   The Technology System Provider must provide the Medallion or Street
Hail Livery Owner with a renewal contract with new terms or notification of
non-renewal at least ninety (90) days but no more than one hundred and twenty
(120) days before the existing contract term end date. Failing to provide
adequate notice to the Owner, the contract may be extended, at the discretion
of the Owner, for ninety (90) days from date of receipt of renewal contract or
notification of non-renewal.
   (d)   Termination of the contract is permitted as follows:
      (1)   If either party defaults in the performance of any of its material
obligations under the contract, and does not cure the default within fifteen
(15) days of receipt of a reasonably detailed notice of default from the other
party, then the non-defaulting party may terminate the contract for cause by
giving a written notice of termination;
      (2)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee may terminate the
contract by giving written notice of termination if:
         (i)   a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is taken out of service because
the Technology System and/or the Technology System Provider is not in
compliance with the Technology System requirements, and
         (ii)   the Technology System Provider fails to cure the noncompliance
within ten (10) days after receiving written notice of such noncompliance by
the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee.
      (3)   (i)   If the Technology System Provider's License is not renewed,
the Technology System Provider must immediately notify the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee of the expiration date of the License, and the contract
will be deemed terminated by the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee on the
ninetieth (90th) day after the expiration date or may be terminated earlier by
the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee by giving written notice of
termination.
         (ii)   When the Technology System Provider's License expires, the
Technology System Provider must continue to provide to the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee all services required by 35 RCNY
Chapter 66 for the same terms in effect prior to the expiration of the
Technology System Provider's License, including but not limited to Maintenance
Service in accordance with 35 RCNY §
66-18, to the extent provided in this subparagraph. The contract provisions
shall survive termination for one hundred fifty (150) days after the date of
expiration of the Technology System Provider's License or until the Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensee has obtained a Technology System and related
services from another Technology System Provider, whichever is earlier.
      (4)   (i)   If the Technology System Provider's License has been
suspended by the Taxi and Limousine Commission for a period of thirty (30) days
or more, the Technology System Provider must immediately notify the Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensee of the dates during which the License is suspended.
Upon notification, but prior to the end of the suspension, the Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensee may opt to terminate the contract by giving written
notice to the Technology System Provider.
         (ii)   During the period of suspension of the Technology System
Provider's License and after termination of the contract if the Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery Licensee opts for termination, the Technology System
Provider must continue to provide to the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee
all services required by 35 RCNY
Chapter 66, including but not limited to Maintenance Service in accordance with
35 RCNY §
66-18. The contract provisions survive during the suspension period and, if the
contract is terminated, for one hundred twenty (120) days after the end date of
the suspension period or until the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee has
obtained a Technology System and related services from another Technology
System Provider, whichever is earlier.
      (5)   (i)   If the Technology System Provider's License has been revoked
by the Taxi and Limousine Commission, the Technology System Provider must
immediately notify the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee of the revocation
date. The contract will be deemed terminated by the Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensee on the ninetieth (90th) day after the revocation date or may be
terminated earlier by the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee giving written
notice of termination.
         (ii)   Upon the revocation of the Technology System Provider's
License, if the Technology System is functioning properly, the Technology
System Provider must continue to provide to the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensee all services required by 35 RCNY
Chapter 66, including but not limited to Maintenance Service in accordance with
35 RCNY §
66-18. The contract provisions shall survive revocation for one hundred fifty
(150) days after the date of revocation of the Technology System Provider's
License or until the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee has obtained a
Technology System and related services from another Technology System Provider,
whichever is earlier. If the Technology System is not functioning properly, the
Technology System Provider must cease its operations with respect to the
Technology System.
      (6)   If the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee terminates the
contract for the reasons provided in paragraphs one through five and
subparagraph (i) of paragraph eight of this subdivision, the Technology System
Provider must provide to the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee:
         (i)   De-installation of the Technology System at no charge; and
         (ii)   If the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee purchased the
Technology System for ownership, a refund of the purchase price of the
Technology System based on the net book value of such Technology System,
applying straight line depreciation by using the purchase price as the cost
basis and assuming a sixty (60) month useful life with no salvage value.
      (7)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee may terminate the
contract at any time and for any reason if:
         •   at least thirty (30) days written notice is given to the
Technology System Provider and
         •   if the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee pays a termination
charge specified in the contract.
      (8)   The termination charge must not be more than twenty-five percent
(25%) of all remaining fixed monthly charges applicable to the Technology
System, not including any fees waived by the Technology System Provider in the
three (3) months prior to termination, multiplied by the number of months
remaining in the term of the contract, not to exceed twelve (12) months. The
termination charge will not apply to any termination of the contract:
         (i)   where the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee is permitted to
terminate the contract without incurring liability or
         (ii)   where at the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee's request
the Technology System is removed from one vehicle and installed in another
vehicle to be operated under the same Taxicab or Street Hail Livery License.
      (9)   The Technology System Provider or the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensee may terminate the contract upon ten (10) days written notice to the
other party:
         (i)   if such other party ceases to do business; or
         (ii)   in the case of the insolvency of, or commencement of any
proceeding by or against, the other party, either voluntary or involuntary,
under the Bankruptcy Code, or relating to the insolvency, receivership,
liquidation, or composition of the other party for the benefit of creditors.
   (e)   Upon Owner/Agent's written notice, the Technology System Provider must
remove the Technology System(s) in the requested vehicles on a schedule of at
least (4) four vehicles per business day.
      (i)   Technology System Provider is not obligated to remove a Technology
System with less than twenty-four (24) hour notice from the Owner/Agent.
      (ii)   Except where the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee terminates
the contract pursuant to paragraphs one through five or subparagraph (ii) of
paragraph eight of subdivision (d) of this section, or where the contract
expires, the Technology System Provider may charge the Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery Licensee a de-installation charge for each Technology System removed.
   (f)   The Technology System Provider must reimburse the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee for any and all Fines caused by a failure of the
Technology System or any of its components to perform in accordance with the
Technology System requirements as required by 35 RCNY §
66-19 where such failure is not attributable to the acts or omissions of the
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee or Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver,
the abuse or misuse of the Technology System or other circumstances beyond the
control of the Technology System Provider. For purposes of this provision, the
term "Fine" means any and all fees, fines, or financial penalties imposed on a
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee or Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver
by the Commission or other any City agency.
   (g)   In the case of a Fine covered by subdivision (f) of this section, the
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee must make reasonable efforts to mitigate
the amount of the Fine, including not operating the Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery if the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee knows or has reason to
know the Technology System is malfunctioning.
   (h)   The Technology System Provider must provide to a Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Licensee all intellectual property licenses needed to operate and
use the Technology System. If the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee
assigns its rights in any Technology System to an assignee approved by the
Technology System Provider, the intellectual property licenses are transferable
to the assignee without payment of any additional charge.
   (i)   If the Technology System Provider subcontracts any services related to
the Technology System, the Technology System Provider will be fully responsible
to the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee for the acts and omissions of its
subcontractors and of persons either directly or indirectly employed by such
subcontractors.
   (j)   The Technology System Provider and the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensee will agree that the contract is deemed to be executed in the City and
State of New York, regardless of the domicile of the parties, and is governed
by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of New York
(notwithstanding New York choice of law or conflict of law principles) and the
laws of the United States, where applicable.
   (k)   The Technology System Provider and the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
Licensee agree that any and all claims asserted by or against either party
arising under or related to the contract will be heard and determined either in
the courts of the United States located in the City of New York or in the
courts of New York State located in the City of New York.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 66-18 Business Requirements – Maintenance of Technology System.
   (a)   Maintenance Service. The Technology System Provider must provide to a
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee such maintenance services as are
necessary to maintain the Technology System in good working order and in
accordance with the requirements in 35 RCNY §
66-24. Such maintenance services must include but not be limited to: 
      (1)   Providing preventive and remedial maintenance of the Technology
System at a maintenance facility;
      (2)   Providing and installing replacement parts, and Hardware and
Software Updates; and
      (3)   Maintaining a maintenance log for each Technology System installed
by the Technology System Provider that states in detail all preventive
maintenance, remedial maintenance and other actions performed on such
Technology System. The Technology System Provider must provide a copy of the
maintenance log when a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Licensee or the Commission
request one.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or
66-18(a)(1)-(3) suspension up to 60 days or revocation for Appearance REQUIRED
                each paragraph violated
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-19 Business Requirements – Compliance with Technology System Requirements.
   (a)   Credit, Debit, and Prepaid Card Payment. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider must ensure that a System that has
been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery provides Credit, Debit, and
Prepaid Card Services in compliance with the requirements of subdivision (a) of
35 RCNY §
66-24.
      (2)   If the Technology System Provider maintains a credit card merchant
account on behalf of the Medallion Owner or Street-Hail Livery Licensee, the
Technology System Provider must ensure that, when Passengers pay by credit,
debit, or prepaid card, the Medallion Owner or the Medallion Owner's authorized
payee receives deposit of funds within forty-eight (48) business hours,
excluding banking holidays, of transaction settlement.
 
35 RCNY §      Penalty: $500 per day payment is late and/
66-19(a)(1)-(2) or suspension up to 60 days or revocation  Appearance REQUIRED
                for each paragraph violated
 
   (b)   Trip Data Collection and Transmission. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider must ensure that a System that has
been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery provides Trip Data collection
and transmission in compliance with the requirements of subdivision (f) of 35
RCNY §
66-24.
      (2)   A Technology System Provider must transmit Trip Data to the
Commission using the frequency, method, and naming convention defined by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(b)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (c)   Vehicle Positioning. A Technology System Provider must ensure that a
Technology System that has been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
provides Logged On Location Positioning and Logged On Hail Exclusionary
Location Positioning. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(c)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (d)   Security. A Technology System Provider must ensure that every
Technology System that has been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is
in compliance with the security requirements of subdivision (i) of 35 RCNY §
66-24. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(d)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (e)   Data Retention. A Technology System Provider must ensure that, for
every Technology System that has been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery, all data required to be maintained pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-24 is maintained for the period required in subdivision (j) of 35 RCNY §
66-24. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(e)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (f)   Cooperation with E-Hail Application Providers. A Technology System
Provider must make available to an E-Hail Application Provider, at the E-Hail
Application Provider's request, an API, test environment and simulator as
described in subdivision (e) of 35 RCNY §
66-24. A newly licensed Technology System Provider must be able to satisfy the
requirement of this subdivision within two (2) months of licensure. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(f)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (g)   Inspection by TLC. A Technology System Provider must ensure that every
Technology System that has been installed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
can be inspected by Commission personnel as required in subdivision (k) of 35
RCNY §
66-24. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-19(g)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (h)   Commission Ordered Testing. In any proceeding where the Technology
System Provider has been found guilty of a violation of subdivisions (a)
through (g) of this section, the Commission may order the Technology System
Provider to provide, within sixty (60) days of the final decision on the
violation 
      (1)   documentation demonstrating that, subsequent to the violation, an
independent third party with relevant expertise, acceptable to the Commission,
has performed testing of the Technology System and related services to
determine that the condition giving rise to the violation has been corrected,
and
      (2)   certification by such third party of the successful results of such
testing.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 66-20 Business Requirements – Record-Keeping and Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Trip Data and its component elements must be stored, maintained and
accessible to the Commission and any designee.
   (b)   Upon request by the Commission, Technology System Providers must
create, modify, and maintain web services as prescribed by the Commission that
facilitate the querying and downloading of Trip Data, as well as hardware model
numbers and software version numbers of each System operating in a Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery.
   (c)   Trip Data must be available and accessible to the Commission at all
times.
   (d)   Except in accordance with law, no third party other than the
Commission may access data for transactions in which such third party was not
involved and for which it had no responsibility;
   (e)   The Trip Data relating to a particular Taxicab must be accessible to
the Medallion Owner or appointed licensed Agent servicing that Taxicab;
   (f)   In the event of a failure or interruption in transmission of Trip
Data, the Technology System must be capable of saving and restoring
transmission of the data without any degradation of data integrity or loss of
data;
   (g)   All data required to be collected and transmitted pursuant to this
section must be transmitted according to a schedule prescribed by the
Commission.
   (h)   Maintain Contracts with Medallion and Street-Hail Livery Owners. A
Technology Service Provider Licensee must maintain copies of all active
contracts for the use of the Technology System.
 
 
35 RCNY §       Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or     Appearance REQUIRED
66-20(a) - (h)  suspension up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (i)   Record Retention Period. A Technology System Provider must maintain
the records required by this section for three (3) years. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-20(i)    up to 60 days or revocation
 
   (j)   Examination of Records. A Technology System Provider must allow any
agent of the Commission or any law enforcement official to examine at any time
all of the records the Technology System Provider is required to maintain under
this Chapter. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
66-20(j)    compliance
 
   (k)   Inspection of Premises. A Technology System Provider must allow any
agent of the Commission or any law enforcement official to inspect any portion
of its business premises at any time, as permitted by law. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-20(k)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 66-21 Business Requirements – Use of Personal Information and Certain
Location-Based Data.
The Technology System Provider must collect, use, and process Personal
Information in accordance with the information security and use of personal
information policy it has on file with the TLC pursuant to subdivision (g) of
35 RCNY §
66-05.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 fine and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
66-21
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 66-22 Business Requirements – Cooperation with the Commission.
   (a)   The Technology System Provider must make commercially reasonable
efforts, as described in this section, to cooperate with the Commission, its
designees and any contractor(s) of the Commission, including the Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher as defined in section 35 RCNY §
51-03:
      (1)   in the development and support of any application(s) developed by
the Commission or the Commission's designees, where such applications are
developed specifically for the purpose of interoperating with the Technology
System (including but not limited to smartphone applications); and
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $5,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
66-22(a)
 
   (b)   The Technology System Provider must provide a data connection for
TLC's Accessible Dispatch Program. The data connection will, at a minimum,
provide the following functionality in the manner specified by the Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher:
      (1)   Automatically indicate the log on/off status of the Vehicle to the
contractor's systems;
      (2)   Automatically switch to the appropriate log on/off status in
response to the Driver's use of the contractor's system;
      (3)   Driver must be within 0.35 of a mile in order to indicate that the
vehicle is at the pickup location;
      (4)   Notify the Driver of a Dispatch using the Technology System's
driver interface in a manner that identifies such dispatch as coming from the
Accessible Taxi Dispatcher; and
      (5)   Transmit all Trip Data to the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher's system
as it is collected.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $5,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
66-22(b)
 
   (c)   The Technology System Provider may only charge the Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher for the costs of labor, equipment, data, data connections, or any
other expense resulting from the data connection to the Accessible Dispatch
Program. All expenses charged to the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher must be clearly
documented.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
66-22(c)
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 66-23 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules.
   (a)   Acceptance of Gift or Gratuity. A Technology System Provider Licensee
or any person acting on the Technology System Licensee's behalf or any of the
Technology System Provider Licensee's employees must not accept any gift,
gratuity, or thing of value from an owner or driver of any vehicle licensed by
the Commission or from anyone acting on behalf of an owner or driver for the
purpose of violating any of these rules through acts of commission or
omission. 
   (b)   Reporting Requests for Gift or Gratuity. A Technology System Provider
Licensee, any person acting on the Technology System Provider Licensee's
behalf, or any of the Technology System Provider Licensee's employees must
immediately report to the Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation
any request or demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any employee,
representative, or member of the Commission or by any public servant. 
   (c)   Offer of Gifts and Gratuities. A Technology System Provider Licensee
or any person acting on the Technology System Provider Licensee's behalf or any
of the Technology System Provider Licensee's employees must not offer or give
any gift, gratuity, or thing of value to any employee, representative, or
member of the Commission or to any other public servant. 
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Reporting Offers of Gift or Gratuity. A Technology System Provider
Licensee must notify the Commission immediately by telephone and in writing or
email within 24 hours after receiving any offer of a gift or gratuity
prohibited by subdivision (a) of this section. 
   (e)   Fraud, Misrepresentation & Larceny. A Technology System Provider
Licensee, while performing his or her duties and responsibilities as a
Technology System Provider Licensee, must not commit or attempt to commit,
alone or in concert with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation, or
larceny. Examples of fraud, misrepresentation or larceny include, but are not
limited to: 
      •   calibration of a fare other than that set by the Commission;
      •   adjustment of the tire size, driving axle, transducer, wiring, or
other equipment for the purpose of generating an inaccurate signal of time or
distance into the Taximeter or the Technology System;
      •   the manufacture, sale or installation of any device that is either
designed to or does generate a false or inaccurate signal into the Taximeter or
the Technology System; or
      •   falsification of Trip Data.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(e)
 
   (f)   Willful Acts of Omission and Commission. 
      (1)   Omission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Technology System Provider Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act whose failure to perform is against the
best interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these
Rules. 
      (2)   Commission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Technology System Provider Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform,
alone or with another, any act that is dishonest, fraudulent or against the
best interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these
Rules. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(f)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Notice of Criminal Conviction. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider Licensee must notify the Commission in
writing within two (2) days after any criminal conviction of the Licensee or
any of the Licensee's Business Entity Persons.
      (2)   Notification must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition of the conviction issued by
the clerk of the court.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(g)    30 days
 
   (h)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. A Technology System Provider Licensee must
not threaten, harass, or abuse any governmental or Commission representative,
public servant, or other person while performing his or her duties and
responsibilities as a Licensee. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(h)    30 days or revocation
 
   (i)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. A Technology System Provider Licensee
must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a Commission
representative, public servant, or other person while performing his or her
duties and responsibilities as a Licensee. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(i)    60 days or revocation
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Technology System
Provider Licensee must cooperate with all law enforcement officers and
representatives of the Commission at all times. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-23(j)
 
   (k)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission. A Technology System Provider
Licensee must answer and comply as directed with all questions, communications,
notices, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its representatives.
A Licensee must produce his or her Commission License and other documents
whenever the Commission requires. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
66-23(k)    compliance
 
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 66-24 Technical Requirements – Technology System.
No Technology System will be approved by the Commission pursuant to this
Chapter unless it complies with the all of the requirements set forth in this
section, unless such requirements are waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (f) of 35 RCNY §
66-05.
   (a)   Driver, Vehicle, and Software Authentication. 
      (1)   Upon boot-up, the Technology System must automatically check for
and install any software updates prior to allowing the Driver to engage the
Technology System.
      (2)   The Technology System must only allow the Driver to engage the
Technology System and Taximeter upon log-in using either biometrics or username
and PIN, validated against a system-initiated search of Valid TLC Licenses.
      (3)   Valid TLC and any state Department of Motor Vehicle credentials.
The Technology System must interact with the Taximeter only upon successful
log-in, which requires system-initiated search of Valid Department of Motor
Vehicle and TLC Licenses (including both a TLC Driver License number and the
Medallion number).
         (i)   The Technology System Provider is only responsible for the
review and the screening of TLC and DMV data that has been provided by the TLC.

 
35 RCNY §    Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
66-24(a)(3)  
 
      (4)   If the data recording element of the Technology System is not hard-
mounted to the vehicle, the Technology System must allow the Driver to engage
the Technology System and Taximeter only after capturing the Vehicle's license
number and validating that the Vehicle's license is active.
         (i)   The Technology System may not allow the Driver to enter the
Vehicle's license number manually.
      (5)   If any required functionality or hardware is disconnected or
inoperable, the Technology System must notify the Driver that the Technology
System needs to be serviced and must not allow any Driver to engage the
Taximeter until the Technology System is repaired to the extent practicable.
      (6)   The Technology System must automatically log a Driver out of the
Technology System after a 15 minute period of inactivity when the Vehicle's
engine is off.
      (7)   The Technology System must automatically log a Driver out of the
Technology System if another Driver logs into the Technology System.
      (8)   The Technology System must prevent a Driver from logging into more
than one Technology System at the same time.
   (b)   Driver Functionality and Interaction. 
      (1)   The Technology System must enable the Driver to log off, log on,
and log on but be marked unavailable for street-hail.
      (2)   While logged off or logged on but unavailable for street-hail, the
Vehicle's roof-light must automatically turn off, and the Taximeter must be
disengaged until the Driver logs in.
      (3)   The Technology System must prevent Drivers from selecting Taximeter
rates outside of the areas where they may legally be charged pursuant to the
following specifications:
         (i)   JFK – Manhattan Rate – Taxicab Drivers must be allowed to select
Rate 2 inside of Manhattan or JFK Airport but be prevented from selecting Rate
2 otherwise. Street Hail Livery Drivers must be prevented from selecting Rate
2.
         (ii)   Nassau and Westchester Counties - Drivers must not be allowed
to select Rate 4 outside of Nassau and Westchester Counties.
      (4)   The Technology System must allow the Driver to enter a toll in all
of the following ways:
         (i)   Either accept or decline a toll automatically triggered by the
Technology System when within the five boroughs of New York City;
         (ii)   Select a toll from a predetermined list that includes all tolls
within the five boroughs of New York City.
         (iii)   Enter a custom toll amount that is added to the total fare, to
be accessible to the driver only, when outside the five boroughs of New York
City.
      (5)   When adding tolls to the Taximeter, the Technology System must
automatically add the correct toll amount to the fare based on the EZ-Pass rate
for that toll and time of day.
      (6)   If a Passenger pays using a method other than cash, the Technology
System must notify the Driver when payment for the total fare has been
completed.
      (7)   The Technology System must be capable of generating End-of-Shift
Data for the Driver that can be printed from the Taximeter or accessed
electronically, at the Driver's preference. End-of-Shift Data must contain the
following information:
         (i)   Medallion or SHL permit number;
         (ii)   Driver's License number;
         (iii)   shift start date and time;
         (iv)   shift end date and time;
         (v)   distance traveled over the duration of the shift;
         (vi)   number of cash trips;
         (vii)   total cash fares collected;
         (viii)   total MTA tax collected;
         (ix)   total Taxicab Improvement Surcharge or Street Hail Livery
Improvement Surcharge collected;
         (x)   total credit/debit/prepaid fares collected; and
         (xi)   total credit/debit/prepaid tips collected.
      (8)   The Technology System must be able to receive and allow Drivers to
accept or reject E-Hails from any TLC-licensed E-Hail Application that opts to
interface with the Technology System in accordance with the Public API provided
pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-24(e)(1).
      (9)   The Technology System must allow a Driver to interact with the
Technology System ONLY when the Vehicle is standing or stopped, except that the
Technology System may permit a Driver to accept or reject an E-Hail request,
engage the Taximeter, or disengage the Taximeter with a single touch using pre-
programmed buttons or using voice activation while the vehicle is in motion.
All other use of the Technology System by the Driver must be velocity gated to
prevent its use while the vehicle is in motion.
   (c)   Passenger Functionality and Interaction. 
      (1)   The Technology System must provide Passengers with the following
payment and fare information:
         (i)   the Technology System must notify the Passenger that the
mechanism for acceptance of credit/debit/prepaid cards is not operational, as
applicable;
         (ii)   the Technology System must instruct the Passenger how to engage
accessibility features for individuals with vision disabilities without
requiring the assistance of a Taxicab Driver;
         (iii)   the Technology System must notify the Passenger of any changes
to the Taximeter rate or any additions of tolls, surcharges, extras, or other
charges, including the name and amount of the charge, in a reasonable manner
and length of time for a Passenger to be alerted to the addition; and
         (iv)   all payment devices must turn on when the Taximeter disengages,
to allow payment processing.
      (2)   Any Passenger-facing screen displaying third-party content must be
authorized by the TLC and adhere to the following specifications:
         (i)   a Passenger-facing screen must display a prologue provided by
the TLC at the start of each trip
         (ii)   following the TLC-provided prologue, a Passenger-facing screen
must clearly give passengers an opportunity to mute and/or turn off the screen
prior to displaying any third-party content
         (iii)   the Passenger must be able to turn off any Passenger-facing
screen (i.e. render the screen blank and muted) at any time except that all
payment devices must turn back on when the Taximeter disengages, to allow
payment processing
         (iv)   the volume of any Passenger-facing device must be mutable and
must be controlled by the Passenger, and
         (v)   any Passenger-facing device that displays third-party content
must display content provided by the TLC, subject to the following limitations:
            (A)   The content provided by the TLC will be in the same format as
the third-party content displayed by the Passenger-facing device, and
            (B)   No more than fifteen percent (15%) of the Passenger-facing
device's content will be comprised of TLC-provided content.
      (3)   Accessibility. Technology System Provider Licensees must provide
the following accommodations for Passengers with vision disabilities: 
         (i)   The credit card reader must be installed in the Passenger
compartment in each Taxicab,
         (ii)   Speakers must be installed in the Passenger compartment in each
Taxicab. The speakers must provide:
            (A)   audio fare updates on-demand and at the end of the trip to
facilitate payment,
            (B)   automatic audio notifications of all tolls and rates,
            (C)   audio instructions enabling a Passenger to successfully
complete fare payment, including discretionary tipping, E-Payment, and any
other form of payment available in the Taxicab, without requiring the
assistance of a Taxicab Driver,
         (iii)   the ability for a Passenger with a vision disability to engage
accessibility features without requiring the assistance of a Taxicab Driver and
         (iv)   a verbal and hardcopy receipt.
      (4)   After payment is processed, all Passenger-facing devices must clear
all information about the trip and reset to the default screen. Passengers must
not be able to access information about trips other than their own.
      (5)   The Technology System must make available to the Passenger the rate
code currently in effect, the current running total fare, and the itemization
of the total fare at the Passenger's request and at the end of the trip.
      (6)   The Technology System must allow the Passenger to pay fares with
cash, credit, debit, and prepaid cards, and must allow for E-Hail Apps that
provide for E-Payment, and Digital Wallet Application.
      (7)   The Technology System must make available all information
reasonably required for the Passenger to understand and complete electronic
payment of the total fare in English, Spanish, and any other language the
Commission requires.
      (8)   For payments made inside the vehicle other than cash or E-Payment,
the Technology System must allow, but not require, the Passenger to add a
custom tip. If the Passenger elects not to add a tip, the Technology System
must require active confirmation of the Passenger's intent before processing
payment.
      (9)   The Technology System must be able to generate an accurate receipt
for payment of fare and such receipt must be able to be generated for each
Passenger making a payment. Upon the Passenger's request, a receipt must be
transmitted to the Passenger. The receipt must contain the following
information:
         (i)   Medallion or SHL Permit number;
         (ii)   Driver's License number;
         (iii)   trip number;
         (iv)   pick-up date and time;
         (v)   drop-off date and time;
         (vi)   trip distance;
         (vii)   toll (if applicable) amount(s);
         (viii)   surcharge(s), including the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge or
Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge (if applicable) amount(s);
         (ix)   extra charges (if applicable) amount(s), including the E-Hail
Fee, if any;
         (x)   taxes (if applicable) for the entire trip;
         (xi)   itemized listing of each rate code used, and the total amount
of time-and-distance-calculated fare for each rate code;
         (xii)   total amount due;
         (xiii)   the amount that the Passenger paid, if split fare;
         (xiv)   the amount that the Passenger tipped, if paid by method other
than cash;
         (xv)   last four digits of credit, debit or prepaid card account
number used by the Passenger, if applicable. All receipts for transactions by
credit, debit, or prepaid card, or by E-Hail App that provides for E-Payment or
Digital Wallet Application, must mask account numbers except for the last four
digits; and
         (xvi)   the "311" Commission complaint telephone number.
   (d)   Taximeter Interoperability. 
      (1)   The Technology System must be capable of remotely updating the
Taximeter to include surcharges, and any other fees that do not impact the rate
of fare, based on date, time, and/or location if such surcharges and fee are
not already assessed by the Taximeter.
      (2)   The Technology System must be able to receive any Commission
mandated change to the Taximeter via wireless communication initiated by the
Technology System Provider.
   (e)   Public API. All Technology System Providers must maintain an
application programming interface (API) that is available to any licensed E-
Hail Provider and the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher. 
      (1)   The API must include but is not limited to the following
functionalities:
         (A)   Allow the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher to query and obtain a list of a specified number (at least 5) and
type (e.g., WAV, SUV, etc.) of Vehicles that are available for hire and closest
to a designated pickup location, and, for each Vehicle listed in the response
to such query, access real-time meter status, GPS coordinates and direction for
no less than 1 minute following such query. The Vehicle or list of Vehicles
provided in response to any such query must include the medallion or SHL permit
number, vehicle make and model, car type (e.g., SUV, minivan, etc.), wheelchair
accessibility, and Driver name and TLC license number;
         (B)   Allow the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher to send an E-Hail or dispatch via the Technology System to the
Driver of any or all of the Vehicles included in the list of Vehicles provided
in response to a query, including the pickup time and location, and, if
applicable, the pre-arranged fare and drop-off location;
         (C)   Return the Driver's acceptance or rejection of the E-Hail or
dispatch, or, if the driver takes no action within 30 seconds, return a
timeout;
         (D)   Allow the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee or Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher to cancel any E-Hail or dispatch regardless of whether a Driver
has responded;
         (E)   For any Driver that has accepted an E-Hail or dispatch from an
E-Hail Application Provider or the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher, for the duration
of the trip from acceptance through meter off or cancellation, provide the E-
Hail Application Provider or Accessible Taxi Dispatcher with a data feed of
real-time GPS location and ride/meter events, and allow the E-Hail Application
Provider or Accessible Taxi Dispatcher to communicate with such Driver via the
Technology System, including:
            i.   allowing the E-Hail Application Provider or the Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher to provide the Driver with the passenger's name and phone
number and drop-off location, as well as other relevant trip information (e.g.,
"passenger waiting at south entrance", etc.),
            ii.   allowing the Driver to report trip events to the E-Hail
Application Provider or the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher (e.g., "passenger in
vehicle," "passenger no-show," etc.), and
            iii.   providing onsite event when Driver reports being onsite,
provide a no-show event if the Driver indicates a passenger no-show, and
provide a cancel event if the Driver cancels or retracts his or her acceptance
of an E-Hail or dispatch.
         (F)   For licensed E-Hail Applications that provide E-Payment, the API
must include the following payment functionality:
            (i)   Provide access to itemized fare data including time-and-
distance fare, tolls, surcharges, extras, and taxes from the Technology System
and Taximeter, in real time, when the trip has been completed and the Driver
has disengaged the Taximeter;
            (ii)   Receive from the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher a confirmation that electronic credit card payment for the
total fare amount has been successfully processed; and
            (iii)   Receive relevant payment information from the E-Hail
Application Provider or Accessible Taxi Dispatcher to the extent necessary to
display the total charges, including E-Hail service fee and tip (if applicable)
on the receipt and collect and transmit Trip Data.
            (iv)   Provide the name of the credit card merchant.
      (2)   The Technology System Provider may charge the E-Hail Application
Provider or Accessible Taxi Dispatcher a fee not to exceed one dollar ($1.00)
per E-Hail request accepted by a Driver for use of the API. The Technology
System Provider may not charge the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher credit card processing fees greater than the wholesale fees
collected by the credit card issuer and credit card network for that
transaction.
      (3)   The Technology System Provider may require E-Hail Application
Providers sending E-Hails to Drivers via the Technology System to charge a
uniform Passenger cancellation and/or no-show fee.
      (4)   Separate Violations. Each failure on the part of a Technology
System Provider to cooperate with an E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible
Dispatcher for the purpose of maintaining an API as provided in paragraph (1)
of this subdivision will constitute a separate violation of this rule. 
   (f)   Trip Data Collection and Transmission. A Technology System must be
capable of collecting and transmitting to the Commission Trip Data as described
below. The Technology System must conform to the following specifications: 
      (1)   The Technology System must be capable of collecting and
transmitting Trip Data for all fare trips for each Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery in which the Technology System is installed.
      (2)   The Trip Data must not contain any Passenger Personal Information.
      (3)   The Trip Data must include the information set forth below. For
purposes of this subdivision, all times are required to be measured to the hour
and minute in Eastern Standard Time:
         (i)   date, time, and location (latitude, longitude, and human-
readable street address) of the pick-up and drop off, based on the reading from
the Technology System;
         (ii)   date, time, and mileage of the pick-up and drop off, based on
the reading from the Taximeter
         (iii)   trip number from the Technology System;
         (iv)   the number of Passengers splitting payment of the fare (if no
split fare, default to one Passenger), based on the reading from the Technology
System;
         (v)   itemized charges for the trip (itemized by time-and-distance
fare, tolls, surcharges, extras, the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Improvement
Surcharge, and taxes) from the Taximeter, E-Hail App service fee (if the
Passenger is charged such a service fee by the E-Hail App and the fare is also
paid using that App's E-Payment feature), and tip amount if paid by credit/
debit/prepaid card, E-Hail Apps that provides for E-Payment, or Digital Wallet
Application;
         (vi)   payment type (cash, credit/debit/prepaid card or E-Hail App
that provides for E-Payment), pre-tip amount, and tip amount (if captured) for
each Passenger, based on the reading from the Technology System;
         (vii)   transaction status, card type, and time of transaction for
transactions by credit/debit/prepaid card, E-Hail App that provides for E-
Payment, or Digital Wallet Application, processed via the Technology System;
         (viii)   Medallion or SHL permit number from the Technology System;
         (ix)   Driver's License number from the Technology System;
         (x)   all changes to the Driver's logged on-off status and the date,
time, location (latitude, longitude, and human-readable street address), and
meter mileage when a change occurs;
         (xi)   the Driver's shift number from the Technology System;
         (xii)   the name of the credit card processor and the first two and
last four digits of each credit, debit, or prepaid card used by each passenger
for paying fares, either directly or through an E-Hail App that provides for E-
Payment or Digital Wallet Application, based on the reading from the Technology
System;
         (xiii)   All rate codes in effect during a trip from the Taximeter,
and the rate of fare, the times and locations (latitude, longitude, and human-
readable street address), and meter mileage when such rate of fare was in
effect, including but not limited to the time and location when Rate Code 4
went into effect and the fare at the time Rate Code 4 was initiated from the
Taximeter and/or Technology System; and
         (xiv)   Log On Location Positioning, based on the reading from the
Technology System. Log On Location Positioning data must be made available in
Trip Data to within fifteen (15) meters for Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries
while they are logged on or logged on but unavailable for street-hail.
      (3)   Trip Data and its component elements must be stored, maintained and
accessible to the Commission and any designee of the Commission through a web
service specified by the Commission. Until such web service is specified the
Technology System Provider must make the Trip Data accessible via:
         (i)   a near real time web-based portal with functionality and user
interface defined by the Commission; and
         (ii)   downloading and transferring data to the Commission on a weekly
basis using technical specifications defined by the Commission.
   (g)   Advertisements and Other Passenger-facing Content. All Technology
Systems must conform to the following specifications: 
      (1)   All Passenger-facing content must comply with TV-Y through TV-
G ratings in accordance with the standards established by the TV Parental
Guidelines rating system from 8 a.m. – 8 p.m. daily or a similar rating in
industries where such rating systems exist, e.g. the Entertainment Software
Rating Board's rating system for video games.
      (2)   No Passenger-facing content may contain, imply, or declare
endorsement by the City, the Commission, or any other agency of the City
without the prior written consent of the Commission;
      (3)   No Passenger-facing content may contain any content that falls
within the following categories:
         (i)   Advertisements or any other material or information promoting
unlawful or illegal goods, services, or activities;
         (ii)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information
containing obscene images or material (see New York Penal Law 235.00, as such
provision may be amended, modified, or supplemented from time to time);
         (iii)   Advertisements or any other material, images, or description,
which, if sold or loaned to a minor for monetary consideration with knowledge
of its character or content, would give rise to a violation of New York Penal
Law 235.21 (see also New York Penal Law 235.20) as such provisions may be
amended, modified, or supplemented from time to time;
         (iv)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information
that are libelous, defamatory, infringe intellectual property rights, including
but not limited to trademark, copyright or patent rights, of a third party, or
violate New York Civil Rights Law Section 50, as such provisions may be
amended, modified, or supplemented from time to time;
         (v)   Advertisements or any other images, material or information that
demean or disparage an individual or group of individuals. For purposes of
determining whether any such advertisements or other images, material or
information demean or disparage an individual or group of individuals, the
Technology System Provider will determine whether a reasonably prudent person,
knowledgeable of the Taxicab ridership and using prevailing community
standards, would believe that such advertisements or other images, material or
information ridicule or mock, are abusive or hostile to, or debase the dignity
or stature of, an individual or group of individuals;
         (vi)   Advertisements or any other material or information that
propose a commercial transaction where the material or information contained in
it is false, misleading, or deceptive; and
         (vii)   Advertisements or any other material or information that
propose a commercial transaction pertaining to or promote tobacco or tobacco-
related products;
   (h)   Additional Requirements for Technology Systems Installed in Street
Hail Liveries. 
      (1)   The Technology System must prevent the Street Hail Livery Driver
from engaging the Taximeter while in the Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone;
      (2)   The Technology System must be capable of capturing and transmitting
to the Commission a flag indicating whether each trip is a Hail Trip or was
commenced by Dispatch; and,
      (3)   The Technology System must turn off the roof light while the Street
Hail Livery vehicle is in the Hail Exclusionary Zone and the Taximeter is
disabled.
   (i)   Security. All features of the Technology System required by this
section, including the collection, transmission and maintenance of data by the
Technology System Provider, must conform to the most up-to-date versions of
following security standards: 
      (1)   PCI Standards for Merchant Level 1;
      (2)   Level 1 and Level 2 EMV standards;
      (3)   Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications
Citywide Information Security Policy for Service Providers and Encryption
Standards ("DOITT Standards") at http://www.nyc.gov/html/doitt/html/business/
security.shtml; and
      (4)   The information security and use of personal information policy the
Technology System Provider has on file with the TLC pursuant to subdivision (g)
of 35 RCNY §
66-05.
   (j)   Data Retention. All data required to be collected, transmitted and
maintained pursuant to this section must be maintained for at least three (3)
years. 
   (k)   Inspection by TLC. The Technology System Provider must enable the
Commission to inspect all components and inner workings of the Technology
System by providing Commission inspection personnel with access to the
Technology System by magnetic swipe card and through the use of a self-
diagnostic tool. The self-diagnostic tool must automatically check and display
the status of: 
      (1)   the connection and operability of all in-vehicle components of the
Technology System;
      (2)   the Technology System's connection to the credit card processor;
      (3)   the Technology System's connection to the Accessible Dispatch
vendor; and
      (4)   the Technology System's connection to the Technology System
Provider's Trip Data database.
(Added City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 66-25 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous
   (a)   Taxicab Improvement Fund. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the collected Taxicab Improvement Surcharge remitted by the Taxicab
Driver to the Taxicab Improvement Fund within 60 days of the end of the payment
period. For example, the Taxi Improvement Surcharge due for the month of July
must be remitted to the TLC in its entirety by October 1st.
      (2)   The Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Fund at
the time and in the manner required by the Commission.
      (3)   If a Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
does not pay the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Fund
at the time required, non-payment will be grounds for suspension of the
Technology System Provider License or E-Hail Application Provider License, and/
or denial of any renewal application or of any application for another TLC-
issued license, as well as monetary penalties.
 
35 RCNY §          Fine: $1,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
66-25(a)(1) - (3)  compliance
 
   (b)   Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the collected Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge remitted by the
Street Hail Livery Driver to the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund within 60
days of the end of the payment period. For example, the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Surcharge due for the month of July must be remitted to the TLC in
its entirety by October 1st.  
      (2)   The Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Fund at the time and in the manner required by the Commission.  
      (3)   If a Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
does not pay the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail
Livery Improvement Fund at the time required, non-payment will be grounds for
suspension of the Technology System Provider License or E-Hail Application
Provider License, and/or denial of any renewal application or of any
application for another TLC-issued license, as well as monetary penalties.  
 
35 RCNY §          Fine: $1,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
66-25(b)(1) - (3)  compliance
 
      (4)   For trips provided in WAV vehicles, the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Driver Incentive Payment (as specified in 35 RCNY §
82-70(b)) will be paid directly to the Driver by the Technology System Provider
and/or E-Hail Application Provider at the time and in the manner required by
the Commission.
      (5)   For trips provided in non-WAV vehicles, the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Surcharge (as specified in 35 RCNY §
82-26(a)(1)(i)) will be paid directly to the TLC’s Street Hail Livery
Improvement Fund by the Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application
Provider at the time and in the manner required by the Commission.
      (6)   For trips provided in WAV vehicles, distribution records of the
Street Hail Livery Improvement Driver Incentive Payment paid directly to the
Driver by the Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must be submitted to the TLC on a monthly basis at the time and in the manner
required by the Commission.
 
                    Penalty: $500 fine and the Technology
35 RCNY §          System Provider shall pay restitution Appearance REQUIRED
66-25(b)(4) - (5)  to the Driver, equal to the lack of
                    payment received by the Driver.
 
(Added City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff.
6/9/2023; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024; amended City Record 4/
2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 66-26 Trip Request Capabilities.
   (a)   The Technology System must be capable of servicing Accessible E-Hail
Requests to Drivers of Taxis and Street Hail Liveries via a TLC-licensed E-Hail
Application Provider or other solution approved by the TLC.
      (1)   The Technology System must be capable of the following functions:
         (i)   Automatically send Accessible E-Hail Requests to Drivers any
time the taximeter or the Technology System, or both the taximeter and the
Technology System, are on or engaged.
 
35 RCNY § Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
66-26(a)  
 
(Added City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
Chapter 67: Rules for Taxicab Hack-up and Maintenance
§ 67-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish the standards and requirements for preparing a vehicle
for Taxicab Licensing, and
   (b)   To establish the standards and requirements for Taxicab maintenance,
inspection and retirement.
§ 67-02 Penalties.
   (a)   This Chapter is informational in nature and does not contain
penalties. Penalties for failure to follow the rules established in this
Chapter will be found in 35 RCNY
Chapter 80 and 35 RCNY
Chapter 58 which establish specific requirements for the Drivers ot Taxicabs
and owners.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 67-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Clean Air Taxicab is a Clean Air Vehicle, as defined in 35 RCNY §
51-03, that has been Hacked-Up.
   (b)   Rooftop Advertising Fixture means a device that incorporates the
functions of a Roof Light with the displaying of advertising.
   (c)   Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider means the entity responsible for
supplying the Rooftop Advertising Fixture to the Medallion Owner and
maintaining the advertising material.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018)
§ 67-04 Original Verification of Taxicab Candidate as Taxicab Model.
   A Taxicab Candidate must meet the technical specifications in 35 RCNY §
67-05.1A, §
67-05.1B or §
67-05.2, as well as all applicable federal and New York State motor vehicle
standards and requirements, in order to become a Taxicab Model.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018)
§ 67-05 Taxicab Model Choice.
   (a)   Unrestricted Medallions. Unrestricted Medallions may be used with any
Accessible Taxicab Model that complies with 35 RCNY §
67-05.2.
   (b)   Alternative Fuel Medallions. Alternative Fuel Medallions may be used
with any Taxicab Model that:
      (1)   complies with 35 RCNY §
67-05.2; and
      (2)   is a Hybrid Electric Vehicle or is powered by compressed natural
gas that is manufactured by an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) for the
general commercial or consumer market.
   (c)   Accessible Medallions. Accessible Medallions may be used with any
Accessible Taxicab Model that complies with 35 RCNY §
67-05.2.
   (d)   Any vehicle valid for use with any Medallion at the time the vehicle
was Hacked-up can remain in use as a Taxicab until its scheduled retirement as
set forth in 35 RCNY §
67-18.
(Added City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 2/12/2020,
eff. 3/13/2020; amended City Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024)
§ 67-05.1 Specifications for Non-Accessible Taxicab Candidates. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; repealed City Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024)
§ 67-05.1A Standard Specifications for Other Taxicab Models Effective Until
Official Taxicab Vehicle Activation Date. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018)
§ 67-05.1B Official Taxicab Vehicle for use with Unrestricted Medallions
Effective On Official Taxicab Vehicle Activation Date. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016; repealed City Record 5/14/2018,
eff. 6/13/2018)
§ 67-05.1C Specifications for Vehicles for use with Unrestricted Medallions or
Alternative Fuel Medallions After the OTV Activation Date. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018)
§ 67-05.2 Specifications for Accessible Taxicab Candidates.
   (a)   An Accessible Vehicle may be approved for Hack-up if it meets all of
the following conditions:
      (1)   It is a vehicle other than (i) a bus, (ii) a minibus, or (iii) a
van, the chassis for which, as originally manufactured, is designed to seat
eight or more persons.
      (2)   It is capable of transporting at least one passenger using a common
wheelchair (as wheelchair is defined in Code of Federal Regulations, title 49,
section 37.3).
      (3)   It does not seat more than five passengers when presented for Hack-
up.
      (4)   It complies with the requirements in subdivisions (b) and (c) of
this section and all other requirements for Hack-up in 35 RCNY §
67-05.1 that are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   The chassis of the Accessible Vehicle, as originally manufactured,
must have:
      (1)   A maximum horsepower of 290.
      (2)   The original equipment manufacturer's suspension and steering
components.
      (3)   No bumper modifications.
      (4)   Exception regarding bumpers: A bumper modified to allow
installation of a rear-entry ramp may be approved if it satisfies either of the
following:
         (i)   The rear bumper is reinforced.
         (ii)   The modification meets or exceeds Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standards crash testing requirements.
         (iii)   Any rear door lock modifications must meet the Federal Motor
Vehicle Safety Standards and the lock must be attached to the chassis, not the
ramp, unless a secondary lock is attached to the chassis.
         (iv)   The modifier must retain an engineer with a bachelor’s degree
in mechanical engineering with at least 3 years of experience in automotive
manufacturing to certify that each vehicle was modified using the design tested
to meet or exceed Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards.
         (v)   Separate certification for each vehicle must be presented when
the vehicle is submitted for Hack-up as a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle.
   (c)   The Accessible Taxicab as manufactured by the original equipment
manufacturer ("OEM") or as modified by a National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (“NHTSA”)-approved modifier manufacturer (or vehicle modifier),
must meet all applicable Americans with Disability Act specifications as
required for Wheelchair Accessible Vehicles, as well as the following
specifications:
      (1)   The minimum ground clearance (measured from frame, loaded to gross
vehicle weight rating) must be 5 inches.
      (2)   (i)   The minimum passenger compartment length (measured from rear
of driver's seat base to rear seat base) must be 56 inches.
         (ii)   Exception: For an Accessible Taxicab designed to carry a
Passenger using a wheelchair in the front right position beside the Driver, the
minimum passenger compartment length must be 38 inches.
      (3)   The rear compartment of any vehicle approved for use as an
Accessible Taxicab Model must meet the following dimensions as defined by the
Society of Automotive Engineers:
         (i)   Effective legroom (L51) must be at least 34.6 inches.
      (4)   The front compartment of any vehicle approved for use as an
Accessible Taxicab Model must meet the following dimensions:
         (i)   Effective legroom (L34) must be at least 40 inches.
      (5)   Total legroom (the sum of L34 and L51) must be at least 74.6
inches.
      (6)   Where a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle is modified using a side
entry conversion, the original floor of the Accessible Vehicle, if lowered,
must be lowered from the base of the firewall to the area immediately in front
of the rear axle.
      (7)   If a lowered floor assembly is used in the process of converting a
vehicle to a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle, the lowered floor must be stainless
steel (16 gauge minimum) or the equivalent.
      (8)   Sound-deadening material must be applied over the lowered metal
floor and thoroughly secured.
      (9)   The wheelchair ramp must not obstruct the drivers’ rearview sight
while in the stowed position.
      (10)   The system provided to securely hold one or more wheelchairs in
place must be the system known as Q straint QRT Standard or its equal.
      (11)   No anchor points may project more than 1/8 of an inch above the
finished floor.
      (12)   If the Accessible Taxicab has a middle fold-up passenger seat, it
must have a folding mechanism and base plate and must meet the requirements of
the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 207, Code of Federal Regulations,
title 49, and section 571.207.
      (13)   Any modifications to the rear air conditioning must be approved by
the OEM.
      (14)   Any and all electrical wiring, other than as provided by the OEM,
must be PVC-or-better insulated and color-coded for positive identification.
      (15)   The back-up alarm must be an electrically operated device that
produces an intermittent audible signal when the Accessible Vehicle's
transmission is shifted into reverse.
      (16)   The converted vehicle must be obtained from the same converter
which has manufactured the necessary parts/components and provided the labor to
convert the vehicle.
      (17)   Conversion of a vehicle with a salvage title certificate, as
identified by a relevant State Department of Motor Vehicles, is prohibited.
      (18)   All approved Wheelchair Accessible Vehicles, whether modified or
not, must meet all applicable federal and state emissions requirements and
standards.
   (d)   Accessible Official Taxicab Vehicle ("Accessible OTV") is the OTV
modified in a manner that is consistent with the City's contract with Nissan
North America.
   (e)   Requirements for used vehicle conversion to an Accessible Vehicle. A
used non-accessible vehicle may be Hacked-up as an Accessible Vehicle for use
as an Accessible Taxicab, only if:
      (1)   The converted vehicle meets the specifications set forth in this
section.
      (2)   The converter is approved by the Commission and submits
documentation in a form and manner prescribed by the Commission indicating that
the conversion was performed in accordance with the specifications set forth in
this section.
      (3)   The vehicle is included in the list of Commission approved vehicles
posted on the TLC Web site.
      (4)   The converted vehicle passes the required Commission inspections.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024; amended City
Record 9/25/2025, eff. 10/25/2025)
§ 67-06 Requirements for Hacking Up a Taxicab.
   (a)   Requirement. Only Accessible Taxicab Models may be Hacked-Up.
   (b)   Putting Vehicle into Service the First Time. An Accessible Taxicab
Model may be Hacked-up for use as a Taxicab, only if it:
      (1)   IIs new, having fewer than 500 miles on the odometer and is one of
the manufacturer’s two latest vehicle model years (Example: If in calendar year
2022 the manufacturer introduces the 2023 Sienna, only 2022 and 2023 Siennas
may be Hacked-up); or
      (2)   Is a conversion of a used non-Accessible vehicle into an Accessible
vehicle, as provided in subdivision (e) of 35 RCNY §
67-05.2.
   (c)   Continuation in Service. Upon Hack-up, a vehicle may continue in
service with the same Medallion so long as the vehicle passes inspection and
has not yet met its Scheduled Retirement Date, as set forth in 35 RCNY §
67-18.
   (d)   Limited Right to "Re-Hack" for Transfer. A vehicle that has been
Hacked-up as an Accessible Taxicab may be transferred to another Medallion,
with the approval of the Commission and only if the vehicle passes inspection
and meets one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Repossessions. The vehicle is purchased through a bank or other
lender that has acquired the right to sell the vehicle through repossession and
the repossession occurs within 24 months of Hack-up.
      (2)   Same Medallion Owner or Agent. The owner (or owner's Agent) of the
Medallion transfers the vehicle to another Medallion operated by the same owner
or agent.
      (3)   Transfer of Medallion and Vehicle. A vehicle which is in use with
an Independent Medallion can continue in use with that Medallion following the
transfer of that Medallion until its Scheduled Retirement Date if it passes all
inspections and if the vehicle meets all of the following:
         (i)   the vehicle is acquired by a Transferee of an Independent
Medallion together with that Medallion from the Transferor of that Independent
Medallion and
         (ii)   the vehicle was operated by the Transferor of that Independent
Medallion with that Medallion.
   (e)   Re-Hack Transfer Inspection Fee. The Commission may charge an
inspection fee of $50 to inspect a vehicle for transfer to another Medallion as
a re-hack. If necessary, the Commission may charge $25 for replacement of New
York State DMV license plates.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024; amended City
Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024)
§ 67-07 Requirements for Hack-up – Paint, Finish and Lighting.
   (a)   Taxi Yellow. The exterior of the vehicle must be painted taxi yellow
(Dupont M6284 or its equivalent), except for trim. Samples of paint color and
code are to be submitted to the Commission for approval.
   (b)   Front Design. The front of the vehicle, and especially the bumper,
should be designed with strong emphasis on reducing injury to pedestrians.
There must be no unnecessary projections such as rigid hood ornaments.
   (c)   Signs. The vehicle must be provided with signs that conform to the
marking specifications in 35 RCNY §
58-32(i).
   (d)   Auxiliary Turn Signals. Suitable wiring must be provided for a pair of
auxiliary turn signal lamps to be located next to the roof light. These lamps
must not be activated with the brake lights.
   (e)   Roof Light. The vehicle must be equipped with an approved Roof Light.
§ 67-08 Requirements for Hack-up – Occupant Accommodation.
   (a)   Upholstery and Trim.
      (1)   Must be an easy-to-clean material such as vinyl. Exception: If the
vehicle manufacturer installed side airbags or a system which determines
whether a seat is occupied for purposes of inflating an airbag, the upholstery
must be that provided by the manufacturer.
      (2)   Must meet federal (MVSS) standards for flame resistance.
      (3)   Must have a surface suitable for mounting authorized decals.
   (b)   Seats.
      (1)   A Taxicab may be equipped with either bucket or bench seats.
      (2)   The seats must not interfere with the partition and must meet all
other Commission requirements.
      (3)   All replacement seats must be designed by the manufacturer for
installation in the model and year of the vehicle in which the seats are
installed.
   (c)   Rear Windows. A Taxicab must be equipped with rear windows that can be
opened and closed by passengers.
§ 67-09 Requirements for Hack-up – Taximeters.
   (a)   Requirement. The vehicle must be equipped with a sealed, tamper-
resistant Taximeter installed by a Licensed Taximeter Business according to the
rules and regulations in 35 RCNY
Chapter 64. The Taximeter must be installed in a location approved by the
Chairperson which permits safe operation of the vehicle and visibility to the
passenger.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. The Taximeter must meet the specifications
and tolerances published in the most recent National Institute of Standards and
Technology Handbook, and must be approved for use in New York by the NYS
Department of Agriculture and Markets and the Commission. Any new Taximeter
will be subject to a minimum three month test period before approval.
   (c)   Other Technical Requirements.
      (1)   The Roof Light must be controlled by engaging the Taximeter.
      (2)   The Taximeter must be capable of calculating and displaying all
required rates of fare.
      (3)   The Taximeter and all connections must be secure and tamper proof.
All switches, wiring and caps must meet applicable specifications of the
Society of Automotive Engineers.
      (4)   [Reserved.]
      (5)   The Taximeter must, at the end of the trip, display the total sum
of the fare and any extras, taxes, or surcharges assessed on the trip.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018,
eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 67-10 Requirements for Hack-up – Partitions.
   (a)   Requirement.
      (1)   The vehicle must be equipped with a partition that isolates the
driver from the rear seat passengers or all passengers of the vehicle unless
the vehicle is exempt from the partition requirement pursuant to 35 RCNY §
58-35(b).
      (2)   The purpose of the partition is to provide protection to the driver
while ensuring passenger safety and enabling rear seat passengers to enjoy a
clear and unobstructed view of the TLC Drives License, Rate Card, and front
windshield.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   The partition must extend from the ceiling to a specific point as
recommended by the Chairperson and approved by the Commission, based upon the
make and model of the vehicle.
      (2)   The transparent portion of the partition must be constructed of a
mar-resistant polycarbonate not less than 0.375 inches thick that will provide
passengers and drivers with maximum visibility.
         (i)   For a flat partition and a partition for a Taxicab with factory
installed curtain airbags, the transparent portion must extend from the ceiling
to join or overlap with the protective plate of the partition.
         (ii)   For an L shaped partition, on the side that is behind the
driver, the transparent portion of the partition must extend from the ceiling
to join or overlap with the protective plate of the partition. On the side that
extends forward to back between the two front seats, the transparent portion of
the partition must extend from the ceiling to join or overlap with the
protective plate of the partition on the right side of the center console
located between the two front seats.
      (3)   The protective plate must join or overlap with the transparent
portion of the partition and extend downward to the floor of the vehicle. The
protective plate must be a plate of 0.085-inch thick bullet-resistant ballistic
steel or its equivalent if approved by the Deputy Commissioner for Safety and
Emissions. The protective plate must be installed inside and covering the front
seat's entire backrest.
         (i)   The protective plate must extend from the point that the
transparent portion joins it downward to the floor of the Taxicab.
         (ii)   If the transparent portion overlaps the protective plate, the
protective plate must extend from the point of joinder with the transparent
portion downward to the floor of the Taxicab.
         (iii)   For an L shaped partition, the protective plate must also
cover the right side of the center console between the two front seats.
      (4)   The entire protective plate of each partition must have sufficient
padding to prevent injury to any rear-seat passenger in case of a Collision or
sudden stopping, and all surfaces must be free of sharp and rough edges.
      (5)   There must be no opening or gap between the partition and the body
of the vehicle larger than one inch, except for vehicles equipped with factory
installed curtain airbags. In those vehicles, the partition shall allow a space
of six inches on each side, sufficient to permit proper deployment of the
curtain airbags unless the partition is specifically designed by the vehicle
manufacturer to not interfere with the deployment of side curtain airbags.
      (6)   In addition to meeting all other technical specifications, a
partition may be installed only if it does not impair passenger and driver
safety and has the following features:
         (i)   Allows passengers and drivers to communicate with each other
         (ii)   Allows passengers in the rear passenger compartment to pay
fares by cash or by credit card (if the Taxicab is capable of accepting credit
card payments) and to receive receipts for payments and transactions.
(Amended City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/12/2020, eff. 3/13/2020)
§ 67-11 Requirements for Hack-up – Distress Signal Lights.
   (a)   Requirement. An owner must equip all Taxicabs with a help or distress
signaling light system consisting of two turn signal type "lollipop" lights.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   One light must be mounted on the front center of the vehicle,
either on top of the bumper or forward or behind the grill. A second light must
be mounted on top of the rear bumper, to the left of the license plate.
      (2)   Each light must be three to four inches in diameter, have a total
rated output of 32 candle power, and be amber-colored or have an amber-colored
lens so that the light output of the device is the color amber at 32 candle
power.
      (3)   The activator must be installed within easy reach of the driver,
must be silent when operating, and must be fully solid-state.
      (4)   The lights must be able to flash between 60 and 120 times per
minute.
      (5)   The wiring must not affect or interfere with, directly or
otherwise, any wiring or circuitry used by the meter for measuring time or
distance.
§ 67-12 Requirements for Hack-up – In-Vehicle Camera System ("IVCS").
   (a)   Requirement. When an existing IVCS is required to be replaced or when
an IVCS system is installed (including, but not limited to, at Hack-up), it
must be functioning and in good working order and meet the specifications and
installation requirements below.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. 
      (1)   Frequency. The IVCS must capture at least one image per second, or
capture video, while the engine is running and for at least ten (10) minutes
after the engine is shut off.
      (2)   Quality. The IVCS must record sharp, undistorted, and clear images
or video to enable the viewer to identify all passengers under all lighting
conditions, including but not limited to dark and bright light, daylight, and
backlight.
      (3)   Scope. The IVCS must be able to capture the full face of all
occupants of the vehicle, including the driver.
      (4)   Stamping. The IVCS must record the following information on each
image or video frame:
         (i)   Date and time,
         (ii)   Vehicle license number, and
         (iii)   IVCS serial number.
      (5)   Indicator. The IVCS must indicate when the camera is operational
and when there is a malfunction.
      (6)   Retention. The IVCS must retain images or video for at least thirty
(30) days.
      (7)   Stability. The IVCS must be fastened securely with tamper-resistant
hardware.
      (8)   Installation and repairs. Installations and repairs of IVCS may be
performed only by:
         (i)   Installers currently licensed by the Department of Consumer and
Worker Protection or successor agency, or
         (ii)   Taximeter Businesses.
      (9)   Access. The IVCS must be accessible in the following ways:
         (i)   The IVCS and its contents, including image or video, may only be
accessible to the Vehicle Owner and the Taximeter Business or licensed
installer that installed the IVCS.
         (ii)   The Taximeter Business or licensed installer must provide image
or video access to law enforcement agencies, including the New York City Police
Department, the Vehicle Owner, and the Vehicle Driver, upon request, in
standard digital formats.
      (10)   Inspection and approval. Only IVCS models approved by TLC may
satisfy the requirements of this section.
         (i)   After an approved IVCS model is installed, the Vehicle Owner
must provide for inspection a notarized affidavit that includes images taken by
the camera within 14 calendar days after installation, or after repair or
modification after an approved IVCS model is installed.
      (11)   Recordkeeping. IVCS manufacturers must keep a record of the IVCS
installed in each TLC licensed vehicle with the following information:
         (i)   The name of the camera model,
         (ii)   The name of the licensed installer,
         (iii)   The date of installation, and
         (iv)   TLC vehicle license number.
         (v)   The data must be made available to the Commission on a regular
basis as determined by the TLC’s Division of Safety and Emissions, and on
demand.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 67-13 Requirements for Hack-up – Credential Holders.
   (a)   Requirement. A credential holder must be mounted behind the driver in
the vehicle in a manner that does not block the driver's view. The holder will
be on the partition if there is a partition, or on the headrest if there is no
partition.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. A credential holder frame mounted on the
driver's side of the clear portion of the partition must conform to the
following:
      (1)   Be approved by the Commission.
      (2)   Be secured by either rivet or screw at least two inches above the
frame supporting the clear portion of the partition and centered on the
vehicle's steering column or the headrest on the driver's seat facing the rear
passenger's compartment.
      (3)   The frame must have a drop-in or slide-in slot accessible only from
the driver's compartment for the rate card and the driver's license.
      (4)   The frame must have sufficient illumination so that the rate card
and the driver's license are clearly visible from the rear seat after dark.
      (5)   The frame must be sufficiently padded so as not to cause injury to
the driver.
§ 67-14 Requirements for Hack-up – Air Conditioning.
   (a)   Requirement. All vehicles must be equipped with an air conditioner.
The air conditioner must be in good working condition from May 1st through
September 30th each year. In vehicles equipped with a partition, the air
conditioner must include an auxiliary unit for the rear seating area.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   The auxiliary unit must be either standard equipment or optional
equipment built into the vehicle by the vehicle manufacturer.
      (2)   The auxiliary unit must have controls that passengers may operate
in the rear passenger area.
§ 67-15 Requirements for Hack-up – Technology System.
   (a)   Technology System. Every Taxicab must be equipped with Technology
System from a licensed Technology System Provider.
(Amended City Record 4/28/2016, eff. 5/28/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 67-16 Authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
   (a)   Authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   Upon payment of an annual Advertising Permit Fee as described in 35
RCNY §
58-07(g), a Medallion Owner may install and maintain an authorized Rooftop
Advertising Fixture.
      (2)   A Medallion Owner must not install or maintain a Rooftop
Advertising Fixture that is not authorized, or no longer authorized, by TLC.
   (b)   Grandfathered Authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixtures. A Rooftop
Advertising Fixture that is authorized by a Memorandum of Understanding between
the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider and the TLC that is in effect on
August 30, 2011 and was installed in accordance with these rules shall be
deemed to comply with the requirements of these rules.
   (c)   Requirements for Obtaining TLC Approval of a Rooftop Advertising
Fixture.
      (1)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must be tested and certified in
accordance with the Department of Defense Test Standard MIL-STD 810f by a
licensed Professional Engineer and documentation of testing and certification
must be submitted to TLC. (MIL-STD 810f can be found at http://
www.dtc.army.mil/navigator.)
      (2)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must be approved by TLC's Safety
and Emissions Division.
      (3)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider may post advertisements on
the Rooftop Advertising Fixture. Such advertisements:
         (i)   must not exceed the physical dimensions of the advertising
display surface of the rooftop unit.
         (ii)   Exception: An advertisement can exceed the dimensions of the
advertising display surface of the rooftop unit by no more than 100 square
inches if the certification by a Professional Engineer as required in paragraph
one of this subdivision specifically states that the extension is safely
supported upon the Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (4)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must:
         (i)   be two-sided, each side of a shape that is longer across and
shorter in height, although not necessarily a rectangle;
         (ii)   display advertising material to the sides of the vehicle, and
         (iii)   not display advertising material to the front and back of the
vehicle.
      (5)   Variation in approved design.
         (i)   If the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider wants to deviate
from an approved design, it must inform the TLC of any material variation in
the original, approved design before installing a modified fixture.
         (ii)   The TLC shall, within fourteen (14) business days, inform the
Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider whether an additional authorization is
required with respect to the modified Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
   (d)   Maintenance of Rooftop Advertising Fixture. The Rooftop Advertising
Fixture Provider must maintain the Rooftop Advertising Fixture in accordance
with this Rule:
      (1)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must ensure that the
Rooftop Advertising Fixture:
         (i)   is firmly affixed to each taxicab;
         (ii)   is otherwise operating in a safe manner;
         (iii)   is in good working order; this includes that the advertising
displayed on the fixture is firmly affixed; and
         (iv)   displays current advertisements. A current advertisement is one
that includes, but is not limited to, a defined event (such as advertisements
for movies, concerts or events which have fixed opening or running dates) and
only remains current until 60 days following the completion or termination of
the event, or promotes an existing business or consumer product.
      (2)   (i)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must not display
advertising that is offensive to public morals or is otherwise in violation of
New York Penal Law Section 245.11.
         (ii)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must remove any
advertising in violation of subparagraph (i) from public display within fifteen
(15) days after a TLC request to remove such advertising.
   (e)   Termination of Authorization of Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   The Chairperson may terminate authorization of a Rooftop
Advertising Fixture if the provider has not complied with the requirements
stated in this Rule.
         (i)   Prior to terminating authorization, the Chairperson will give
the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider notice of the Chairperson's intent to
terminate authorization and shall provide detailed reasons for the action.
         (ii)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider shall have 21 business
days after the notice to cure any defect or to respond to any concerns set
forth in the notice unless the TLC extends the cure period.
         (iii)   If the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider fails to cure any
defect or fail to respond to any concerns set forth in the Chairperson's notice
to the satisfaction of the Chairperson within the time period allotted by the
TLC, the Chairperson may promptly terminate authorization.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the notice requirements of paragraph one, TLC may
immediately terminate authorization of a Rooftop Advertising Fixture if the
Chairperson determines there is an imminent threat to the health or safety of
members of the public, taxi drivers, or other individuals.
§ 67-17 [Reserved.]
§ 67-18 Scheduled Vehicle Retirement.
   (a)   New Vehicles. All vehicles Hacked-up as new vehicles pursuant to 35
RCNY §
67-06(b)(1) must be retired from Taxicab service and replaced no later than the
first scheduled inspection of the vehicle occurring 84 months after the vehicle
was Hacked-up.
   (b)   Used Vehicles. All vehicles Hacked-up as used vehicles pursuant to 35
RCNY §
67-06(b)(2) must be retired from Taxicab service and replaced no later than the
first scheduled inspection of the vehicle occurring 84 months after the vehicle
was Hacked-up, less the age of the vehicle as determined by the difference
between the calendar year at Hack-up and the model year of the vehicle. For
example, a used 2015 model year vehicle that was hacked up in 2018 is three
years old and must be retired from Taxicab service and replaced no later than
the first scheduled inspection of the vehicle occurring 48 months after the
vehicle was Hacked-up.
   (c)   Final Retirement Date. A vehicle which cannot pass inspection as
provided in subdivision (f) of § 19-504 of the Administrative Code must be
replaced, regardless of whether its Scheduled Retirement Date has been reached.
A vehicle other than a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle that has reached its
Scheduled Retirement Date, including any extensions previously provided for,
must be retired as of that date regardless of whether it may still pass
inspection.
   (d)   Hardship Extension. The owner of a Taxicab may apply to the
Chairperson for a one-time extension of up to six months from the Scheduled
Retirement Date. To obtain approval of a hardship extension:
      (1)   The vehicle owner must demonstrate an economic or other personal
hardship that the Chairperson determines would create an undue burden upon the
owner if the extension were not granted.
      (2)   The vehicle owner must submit a request in writing, together with
any supporting documentation, to the Chairperson at least 30 days before the
Scheduled Retirement Date. This 30-day deadline may be waived by the
Chairperson upon a showing of good cause.
      (3)   The vehicle must continue to meet all safety and emission
requirements throughout the extension. The Chairperson will withdraw any
extension granted whenever the vehicle is determined by the Commission to be
unsafe for operation.
      (4)   The vehicle owner may not own more than one medallion.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 10/18/2024,
eff. 10/18/2024)
§ 67-19 Scheduled Vehicle Retirement. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 6/20/2024,
eff. 7/20/2024; repealed City Record 10/18/2024, eff. 10/18/2024)
Chapter 68: Procedures Relating To Enforcement
§ 68-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish procedures for the enforcement of violations of TLC Rules
and other laws enforced by the TLC, including the Administrative Code of the
City of New York.
   (b)   To establish:
      1.   the requirements for imposing the immediate summary suspension of a
License,
      2.   procedures and protections for Licensees whose Licenses have been
revoked,
      3.   procedures and protections related to the seizure and forfeiture of
unlicensed vehicles, and
      4.   the requirements for the settling and withdrawal of violations.
   (c)   These rules are to be read in conjunction with the rules and
procedures established by the Office of Administrative Trials and Hearings, as
described in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5.
§ 68-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Prescribed Penalties. Whenever a Respondent is charged with a
violation of any Commission Rule or Administrative Code Section, Respondent may
be subject to the civil penalties as set forth in the Commission Rules or the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   Discretionary Penalties. Where provided by local law, instead of any
of the specific penalties in the Commission Rules, the Commission can, in its
discretion, in accordance with subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
68-13, revoke a License, suspend a License up to 6 months, and/or impose:
      1.   A fine, not to exceed $10,000 for each violation, against:
         (A)   the Owner of a Licensed Taxicab or For-Hire vehicle,
         (B)   a Base,
         (C)   a Commuter Van Service or vehicle,
         (D)   a Paratransit service or vehicle,
         (E)   a Taximeter Business,
         (F)   a Taxicab Broker, or
         (G)   a Taxicab agent.
      2.   A fine, not to exceed $1,000 for each violation, against a Licensed
Driver.
   (c)   Imposition of Penalties. Any revocation, suspension, Persistent
Violator Penalty or Penalty Points will become effective on the date the
Respondent is found guilty of the violation.
         1.   Suspensions. Suspensions go into effect when the decision
imposing the violation is issued.
         2.   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is
found guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
            A.   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
         3.   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 68-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Appeal is the request for review of a decision of a Hearing Officer.
   (b)   Appeals Unit is a unit within the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH
responsible for deciding cases on Appeal, who do not hear cases in the first
instance.
   (c)   Default is a decision against a Respondent after a Respondent fails to
appear for a hearing, enter a plea, or make a request to reschedule as required
by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5.
   (d)   Discretionary Revocation is the imposition of the penalty of
revocation when a Rule does not specify that revocation must be imposed (for
example, when "revocation" follows "or" or "and/or" in a penalty box);
Discretionary Revocation can be sought by the Chairperson for any Rule
violation, if the Chairperson determines that the continued licensure of the
Respondent presents a threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
   (e)   Final Decision is the decision of the Hearing Officer at the Taxi and
Limousine Tribunal at OATH and is subject to the appeals process provided for
in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 and the Chairperson review process provided for in 35 RCNY §
68-12.
   (f)   Hearing Officer is a person designated by the Chief Administrative Law
Judge of OATH, or his or her designee, to carry out the adjudicatory powers,
duties, and responsibilities of the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal.
   (g)   Mandatory Revocation is the imposition of the penalty of revocation
when a Rule specifies that revocation must be imposed.
   (h)   Notice of Seizure is a document served upon and mailed to an owner of
a vehicle that has been seized and removed to a secure facility.
   (i)   OATH is the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings.
   (j)   OATH Administrative Law Judge is a person designated by the Chief
Administrative Law Judge of OATH, or his or her designee, pursuant to Section
1049(1)(a) of the Charter, to carry out the adjudicatory powers, duties and
responsibilities of the OATH Tribunal.
   (k)   OATH Tribunal is the New York City Office of Administrative Trials and
Hearings tribunal established by Section 1048(1) of the Charter and 48 RCNY
Chapter 1.
   (l)   Recommended Decision. A Recommended Decision is a decision made by an
OATH ALJ following a hearing that must be reviewed by the Chairperson, either
in its entirety or for the appropriateness of the penalty being imposed, before
it becomes final.
   (m)   Respondent is an individual or Business Entity who has been noticed
and charged with a violation of one or more of these Rules or the
Administrative Code, or with being not Fit to Hold a License.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 68-04 Forum. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 68-05 Service of Summonses.
   (a)   Service. A Respondent must be served with a summons specifying the
nature of the violation charged or the basis for any charge that the Respondent
is not Fit to Hold a License.
   (b)   Licensees. Service of a summons upon a Licensee can be accomplished
through:
      1.   personal service; or
      2.   USPS first class mail addressed to the last Mailing Address filed
with the Commission;
      3.   If the Licensee is a Vehicle Owner (of a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle,
Paratransit Vehicle, or Commuter Van), by personal service upon the Driver, who
must promptly forward the summons or notice to the Owner or Agent; a Driver who
fails to do so will be in violation of these Rules.
      4.   If the Licensee is any Licensee other than a Vehicle Owner or Driver
(for example, owner of a Commuter Van Service, For-Hire Vehicle Base,
Paratransit Base, Taxicab Agent, or Taximeter Business), by personal service
upon a person of suitable age and discretion employed by or acting as an agent
of the Licensee at the Licensee's place of business.
   (c)   Non-Licensees. Service of a summons upon a Respondent who is not a
Licensee can be accomplished through any of the following methods consistent
with the requirements set in the Civil Practice Law and Rules:
      1.   By personal service; or
      2.   By USPS first class mail addressed to the address on the
Respondent's state-issued driver's License or vehicle registration.
      3.   If the Respondent is the registered owner of a vehicle, by personal
service upon the driver of the vehicle.
      4.   If the Respondent is charged with operating an unlicensed Commuter
Van Service, For-Hire Vehicle Base, Paratransit Base, Taxicab Agent, or
Taximeter Business, by personal service upon a person of suitable age and
discretion employed by or acting as an agent of the Respondent at the
Respondent's place of business.
§ 68-06 Contents of Summons.
   (a)   Required Information. A summons must contain, at a minimum, the
following information:
      1.   The date, time, and location of the alleged violation.
      2.   A description of the nature of the violation sufficient to inform
the Respondent of the prohibited conduct, including the basis for any charge
that the Respondent is not Fit to Hold a License.
      3.   The Rule or Administrative Code Section alleged to have been
violated. If there is a conflict between the Rule or Code Section cited and the
description of the violation, the description controls the final resolution of
the issue.
      4.   The date, time, and location of the scheduled hearing on the
violation, or instructions to the Respondent on how to schedule a hearing date.
      5.   Whether the Respondent must appear in person at the hearing.
      6.   If the Commission seeks Discretionary Revocation, a specific
statement that a finding of guilt could result in the revocation of the
Respondent's License.
      7.   If the rule violated includes the penalty of mandatory revocation, a
specific statement that a finding of guilt will result in the revocation of the
Respondent's License.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 68-07 Temporary Licenses Pending Appeal.
   (a)   Temporary License.
      1.   (A)   If the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal's decision results in the
suspension of the Respondent's License and the Respondent files a timely
appeal, the Chairperson can, in his or her discretion, issue a temporary
license pending the determination of the Appeals Unit.
         (B)   If the Appeals Unit's decision results in the suspension of the
Respondent's License (or the continuance of the suspension) and the Chairperson
notifies the Respondent of a review of the Appeals Unit decision pursuant to 35
RCNY §
68-12, the Chairperson can, in her or her discretion, issue a temporary license
pending the determination of his or her review.
      2.   In deciding whether or not to issue a temporary license, the
Chairperson can consider:
         (A)   the Respondent's record,
         (B)   the seriousness of the charges,
         (C)   the likelihood of the success of the appeal, and
         (D)   the significance of the issues raised on appeal.
§ 68-08 Failure to Prosecute by the Commission.
   (a)   If the Commission fails to request a hearing within one year from the
date of the summons, the charges will be withdrawn.
   (b)   If the Chairperson fails to make a determination after receiving a
Recommended Decision within 120 calendar days of the date of receipt of the
Recommended Decision, the charges will be dismissed.
§ 68-09 Final and Recommended Decisions.
   (a)   The decision of the Hearing Officer at the OATH Hearings Division is
final subject to the appeals process provided for in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 and the Chairperson review process provided for in 35 RCNY §
68-12.
   (b)   The determination of an ALJ at the OATH Tribunal will be a Recommended
Decision, subject to review by the Chairperson for the following matters:
      1.   findings and penalty determinations as to the fitness of Licensees
under 35 RCNY §
68-14 or as a result of Discretionary Revocation proceedings under 35 RCNY §
68-13;
      2.   penalty determinations in padlocking or proceedings under
subdivision (b) of § 19-528 of the Administrative Code; and
      3.   findings and penalty determinations in Summary Suspension
proceedings pending Revocation and in Summary Suspension proceedings pending
Compliance.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 68-10 Procedure for Finalizing Recommended Decisions.
   (a)   Respondent's Opportunity to Respond.
      1.   When a Recommended Decision is issued, the Respondent must be given
an opportunity to provide a written response to the Chairperson.
      2.   The response from the Respondent must be limited to only the record
of the hearing and the determination of the OATH ALJ.
   (b)   Submission to Chairperson. The Recommended Decision and record of the
hearing will be submitted to the Chairperson along with any written comments
submitted by the Respondent as provided in subdivision (a) of this section.
   (c)   Final Decision by Chairperson.
      1.   The Chairperson will determine whether to accept, modify, or reject
the Recommendation of the OATH ALJ and will issue a Final Decision.
      2.   As an alternative to 1. above, and instead of issuing a Final
Decision, the Chairperson can remand the matter to the OATH ALJ for further
consideration.
§ 68-11 Appeal of Chairperson's Final Decision.
   (a)   The only Chairperson's Final Decision that can be appealed to the
Commissioners is a Final Decision that imposes Discretionary Revocation (see 35
RCNY §
68-13).
   (b)   The Chairperson's Final Decision to impose Discretionary Revocation
can be appealed to the Commissioners as follows:
      1.   The Respondent must file a written appeal with the Deputy
Commissioner for Legal Affairs/General Counsel within 30 calendar days from the
date of the Chairperson's final decision.
      2.   The filing must describe the basis for the appeal and must include
all supporting statements and arguments.
      3.   The Chairperson can prescribe the form for the conduct and filing of
these appeals.
      4.   A review of the Chairperson's decision by the Commissioners must be
limited to the issues of law raised in the appeal submitted and whether the
decision of the Chairperson and the Recommended Decision of the OATH ALJ are
supported by substantial evidence. The Commissioners cannot review findings of
fact or determinations of credibility by an OATH ALJ.
      5.   The Commission may submit a written response to any appeal filed by
the Respondent.
      6.   The Respondent must be given the opportunity to respond in writing
to the Commission's written submission.
      7.   The Commissioners must each receive a copy of the OATH ALJ's
Recommended Decision, the Chairperson's Final Decision, the Respondent's
appeal, and any responses filed by the Commission or the Respondent.
      8.   The Commission must affirm, reject, modify, or remand the
Chairperson's Final Decision.
         (A)   A minimum of 5 votes is required to reject, modify, or remand
the Final Decision.
         (B)   If there are fewer than 5 votes to reject, modify, or remand the
Final Decision, the decision is affirmed.
         (C)   The Chairperson cannot vote on these appeals.
      9.   The Commission must communicate at a public meeting the results of
the vote and the action taken.
§ 68-12 Chairperson Review.
   (a)   The Chairperson, or if he or she designates, the General Counsel for
the TLC, may review any determination of the Appeals Unit that interprets any
of the following:
      (1)   A rule set forth in
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York;
      (2)   A provision of law set forth in Chapter 5 of Title 19 of the
Administrative Code;
      (3)   A provision of law set forth in Chapter 65 of the Charter.
   (b)   Upon review of a determination of the Appeals Unit, the Chairperson or
the General Counsel may issue a decision adopting, rejecting or modifying the
Appeals Unit decision. The Chairperson will be bound by the findings of fact in
the record and will set forth his or her decision in a written order. The
Chairperson's interpretation of the Commission's rules and the statutes it
administers shall be considered agency policy and must be applied in future
adjudications involving the same rules or statutes.
   (c)   Process for Chairperson Review.
      (1)   Within 30 days of service by OATH of the determination of an appeal
by the Appeals Unit of the OATH Hearings Division, either party may petition
the Chairperson to reject the determination by delivering a petition to the
General Counsel of the TLC and mailing a copy to the adverse party.
         (A)   Petitions to the Chairperson must state the errors of law that
the Petitioner wishes to have reviewed, and must be accompanied by a copy of
the decision of the Appeals Unit.
      (2)   If the respondent delivers and mails such a petition, TLC may
submit an answer to the petition within 30 days by delivering such an answer to
the General Counsel of TLC and serving it on the respondent. Unless the
Chairperson takes action on the respondent's petition within 30 days of its
delivery, the determination of the appeal by the Appeals Unit shall become the
final decision of the Commission.
      (3)   If TLC delivers and mails such a petition, within 30 days the
Chairperson may notify the respondent that he or she is considering the
petition, and within 30 days thereof, the respondent may mail an answer to the
General Counsel of TLC. If the Chairperson does not notify the respondent that
he or she is considering the petition within 30 days of its receipt, or takes
no action on the petition within 30 days of the receipt of respondent's answer
or within 60 days of its notification to the respondent if no answer is
received, the determination of the appeal by the Appeals Unit shall become the
final decision of the Commission.
      (4)   In reviewing the determination of the Appeals Unit of the OATH
Hearings Division, the Chairperson shall be bound by the findings of fact in
the decision.
      (5)   The determination of an appeal by the Appeals Unit that is not
acted upon by the Chairperson shall become a final decision of the Commission.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 68-13 Special Procedures – Mandatory Revocation and Discretionary Revocation
(and Other Penalties).
   (a)   Mandatory Revocation. Mandatory License revocation will be imposed
when a Respondent is found liable for a violation in which mandatory revocation
is specified.
   (b)   Discretionary Penalties. If the Commission seeks Discretionary
Revocation or other discretionary penalties as specified in subdivision (b) of
35 RCNY §
68-02, the following procedure must be followed.
      (1)   The Chairperson must determine that the continued licensure of the
Respondent presents a threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
      (2)   The proceeding must be commenced before the OATH Tribunal.
      (3)   The Commission must notify the Respondent of the proceeding by
serving a written summons detailing the charged misconduct and warning the
Respondent that a finding of guilt could result in License revocation.
      (4)   The Respondent must be served with charges according to the
procedures in 48 RCNY
Chapter 1, which include the location, date, and time of any scheduled hearing.
      (5)   The hearing will be conducted by an OATH ALJ and governed by the
procedures in 48 RCNY
Chapter 1. The affirmative defenses set forth in subdivision (b) of § 19-512.1
of the Administrative Code will be available in the hearing.
      (6)   The OATH Tribunal decision will be a Recommended Decision. The
recommended penalties can include:
         (A)   License revocation,
         (B)   License suspension for a period up to 6 months,
         (C)   a fine not to exceed $1,000 for each offense for which a
Licensed Driver is found guilty, and
         (D)   a fine not to exceed $10,000 for each offense for which any
other Respondent is found guilty.
§ 68-14 Special Procedures – Fitness Revocation Hearings.
   (a)   The Chairperson will notify the Licensee to appear as a Respondent for
a fitness hearing if the Chairperson believes that a Licensee is not Fit to
Hold a License, for the following reasons, based upon:
      (1)   Any act that implicates the Licensee's ability to safely interact
with the public or operate a TLC licensed vehicle, including but not limited
to:
         (A)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of driving a TLC licensed
vehicle while Impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content), or Drugs;
         (B)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of bribery, fraud,
material misrepresentation, theft, threat against a person, harassment, abuse,
or use of physical force;
         (C)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, involving the possession
of a Weapon in a vehicle licensed under these Rules;
         (D)   Driver, while driving a Licensed Vehicle, was issued a summons
for or charged with one or more traffic related violations or crimes in a
Serious Crash, that is, a crash in which any person has suffered Critical
Injury or death;
      (2)   Any felony conviction;
      (3)   Any conviction of the following criminal offenses:
         (A)   Assault in the third degree, as set forth in New York State
Penal Law § 120.00;
         (B)   Reckless endangerment in the second degree, as set forth in New
York State Penal Law § 120.20;
         (C)   Criminal obstruction of breathing, as set forth in New York
State Penal Law § 121.11;
         (D)   Sexual misconduct, as set forth in New York State Penal Law §
130.20;
         (E)   Forcible touching, as set forth in New York State Penal Law §
130.52;
         (F)   Sexual abuse in the third or second degree, as set forth in New
York State Penal Law § 130.55 and § 130.60, respectively;
         (G)   Promoting prostitution in the third, second, or first degree, as
set forth in New York State Penal Law § 230.25, § 230.30, and § 230.32,
respectively;
         (H)   Compelling prostitution, as set forth in New York State Penal
Law § 230.33;
         (I)   Sex trafficking, as set forth in New York State Penal Law §
230.34;
         (J)   Public lewdness, as set forth in New York State Penal Law §
245.00;
         (K)   Endangering the welfare of a child, as set forth in New York
State Penal Law § 260.10;
         (L)   Criminal possession of a weapon in the fourth degree, as set
forth in New York State Penal Law § 265.01;
         (M)   Overdriving, torturing, and injuring animals or failing to
provide proper sustenance, as set forth in New York Agriculture and Markets Law
§ 353;
         (N)   Leaving the scene of an accident, as set forth in New York
Vehicle and Traffic Law § 600.2;
         (O)   Driving while ability impaired, as set forth in New York Vehicle
and Traffic Law § 1192.1;
         (P)   Operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated, as set forth in
New York Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1192.2;
         (Q)   Operation of a motor vehicle with an illegal blood-alcohol
content, as set forth in New York Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1192.3;
         (R)   Driving while ability impaired by drugs, as set forth in New
York Vehicle and Traffic Law § 1192.4.
         (S)   Driving while ability impaired by the combined influence of
drugs or of alcohol and any drug or drugs, as set forth in New York Vehicle and
Traffic Law § 1192.4-a.
         (T)   The functional equivalent of the above-referenced convictions in
other jurisdictions.
      (4)   A failed drug test as a result of illegal drug use or failure to
comply with drug testing procedures.
   (b)   Prior to the hearing, the Commission must notify the Respondent of the
proceeding by serving a written notice specifying the reason(s) the Respondent
is believed to be not Fit to Hold a License and warning the Respondent that a
finding that Respondent is not Fit to Hold a License will result in License
revocation.
   (c)   The OATH Tribunal's decision after the hearing will be a Recommended
Decision.
   (d)   The Chairperson can accept, reject, or modify the Recommended Decision
in a written decision that includes the reasons therefor. The decision of the
Chairperson will constitute the final determination of the Commission.
   (e)   In determining whether the Licensee is not Fit to Hold a License, to
the extent possible, the Chair shall not revoke the license solely by reason of
the licensee having been convicted of one or more criminal offenses, or by
reason of a finding of lack of "good moral character," when either such finding
is based upon the fact that the individual has been convicted of one or more
criminal offenses, unless:
      (1)   There is a direct relationship between one or more of the criminal
offenses and the duties of a Licensee licensed by the TLC; or
      (2)   The continuation of licensure would pose an unreasonable risk to
property or to the safety or welfare of specific individuals or the general
public.
   (f)   In determining whether the Licensee is not Fit to Hold a License, the
Chair shall be governed by applicable law, and shall further consider the
following factors in his or her Decision:
      (1)   The specific duties and responsibilities necessarily related to
licensure as a Licensee licensed by the TLC.
      (2)   The bearing, if any, the criminal offense or offenses for which the
Licensee was convicted will have on his or her fitness or ability to perform
one or more of the duties or responsibilities of a Licensee licensed by the
TLC.
      (3)   The time that has elapsed since the occurrence of the criminal
offense or offenses.
      (4)   The age of the Licensee at the time of occurrence of the criminal
offense or offenses.
      (5)   The number of years during which the Licensee has held his or her
License and his or her overall record as a Licensee.
      (6)   The seriousness of the offense or offenses.
      (7)   Any information produced by the Licensee, or produced on his or her
behalf, in regard to his or her rehabilitation and good conduct.
      (8)   The legitimate interest of the Commission in protecting the safety
and welfare of specific individuals, the general public, and property.
   (g)   The License of a Licensee who is found to be not Fit to Hold a License
will be revoked.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 5/7/2025,
eff. 6/6/2025)
§ 68-15 Special Procedures – Summary Suspension Pending Revocation.
   (a)   Summary Suspension.
      (1)   The Chairperson can summarily suspend a License if the Chairperson
believes that continued licensure would constitute a direct and substantial
threat to public health or safety, pending revocation proceedings. Such direct
and substantial threats to public health or safety include but are not limited
to:
         (i)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of driving a TLC licensed
vehicle while Impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content), or Drugs;
         (ii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of bribery, fraud,
material misrepresentation, theft, threat against a person, harassment, abuse,
or use of physical force;
         (iii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, involving the
possession of a Weapon in a vehicle licensed under these Rules;
         (iv)   A positive result on a drug test or a drug test sample that
cannot be tested for Drugs.
      (2)   Any Licensee whose License is summarily suspended is entitled to a
Summary Suspension hearing at the OATH Tribunal as set forth below.
      (3)   The Commission will notify the Licensee either by personal service
or by USPS first class mail of the Summary Suspension, within 5 days of the
suspension.
   (b)   Summary Suspension or Revocation Hearing. If a Revocation hearing is
not scheduled to be held within 15 calendar days from the suspension:
      (1)   The Respondent can request a hearing on the Summary Suspension by
notifying the Commission within 10 calendar days from receiving the notice of
suspension.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Commission must
request a Summary Suspension hearing to be held within 10 calendar days of the
receipt of the request (if the tenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
holiday, the hearing may be held on the next business day), unless the
Chairperson determines that the hearing will impair an ongoing civil or
criminal investigation.
      (3)   No Summary Suspension hearing will be required where the Revocation
hearing is scheduled within 15 calendar days of the suspension.
      (4)   If a Respondent does not request a hearing on the Summary
Suspension within the time specified in paragraph (1) of this subdivision, then
all of the following apply:
         (i)   the Respondent is deemed to have waived the opportunity to be
heard on an expedited basis.
         (ii)   The Respondent will be scheduled for a hearing on the
underlying violation in accordance with the normal procedures set forth in 48
RCNY
Chapter 1.
         (iii)   The Summary Suspension will be continued until lifted by the
OATH ALJ in the Revocation hearing.
   (c)   Conduct of Summary Suspension Hearing.
      (1)   The Summary Suspension hearing will be conducted according to the
hearing procedures established in 48 RCNY
Chapter 1.
      (2)   Where applicable, the affirmative defenses will include those
provided in subdivision (b) of § 19-512.1 of the Administrative Code.
      (3)   The decision in the Summary Suspension hearing will be a
Recommended Decision that includes findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a
recommendation as to continuation of the suspension.
      (4)   The decision of the Chairperson is the final determination of the
Commission with respect to the Summary Suspension.
      (5)   Unless otherwise specified, if the Chairperson does not render a
decision within 60 calendar days from the end of the Summary Suspension
hearing, the suspension must be lifted until the decision is rendered.
   (d)   Summary Suspension for Criminal Charges.
      (1)   The Chairperson can summarily suspend a License based upon criminal
charges pending against a Licensee if the Chairperson believes that the
charges, if true, would demonstrate that continued licensure would constitute a
direct and substantial threat to public health or safety. Such charges include
but are not limited to the following:
         (i)   Any charge for a crime which constitutes a felony;
         (ii)   Or any charge for the following offenses:
            A.   Assault in the third degree, as set forth in PL § 120.00;
            B.   Reckless endangerment in the second degree, as set forth in §
120.20;
            C.   Criminal obstruction of breathing, as set forth in § 121.11;
            D.   Sexual misconduct, as set forth in PL § 130.20;
            E.   Forcible touching, as set forth in PL § 130.52;
            F.   Sexual abuse in the third or second degree, as set forth in PL
§ 130.55 and § 130.60, respectively;
            G.   Promoting prostitution in the third, second, or first degree,
as set forth in PL § 230.25, § 230.30, and § 230.32, respectively;
            H.   Compelling prostitution, as set forth in PL § 230.33;
            I.   Sex trafficking, as set forth in PL § 230.34;
            J.   Public lewdness, as set forth in PL § 245.00;
            K.   Endangering the welfare of a child, as set forth in PL §
260.10;
            L.   Criminal possession of a weapon in the fourth degree, as set
forth in PL § 265.01;
            M.   Overdriving, torturing, and injuring animals or failing to
provide proper sustenance, as set forth in AGM § 353;
            N.   Leaving the scene of an accident, as set forth in VAT § 600.2;
            O.   Driving while ability impaired, as set forth in VAT § 1192.1;
            P.   Operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated, as set forth
in VAT § 1192.2;
            Q.   Operation of a motor vehicle with an illegal blood-alcohol
content, as set forth in VAT § 1192.3;
            R.   Driving while ability impaired by drugs, as set forth in VAT §
1192.4.
      (2)   Upon imposing Summary Suspension, the Commission must promptly
notify the Respondent by serving written notice specifying the basis for the
Summary Suspension, advising the Respondent of the right to a Summary
Suspension hearing, and specifying the issue to be decided at the Summary
Suspension hearing.
      (3)   The Commission need not commence revocation proceedings while the
criminal charges are pending. However, the Respondent is entitled to request a
Summary Suspension hearing.
      (4)   If the Respondent requests a Summary Suspension hearing, the
Commission must schedule such hearing to be held within 10 calendar days of
receipt of the Respondent's request. If the tenth day falls on a Saturday,
Sunday or holiday, the hearing may be held on the next business day.
      (5)   At the Summary Suspension hearing, the Commission must prove by a
preponderance of the evidence that the charges pending against the Respondent,
if true, demonstrate that the continuation of the Respondent's License during
the pendency of criminal charges would pose a direct and substantial threat to
public health or safety. At the hearing, both the Commission and the Respondent
may present evidence relevant to the determination, including, but not limited
to:
         (a)   The particular facts and circumstances underlying the criminal
charges, including the connection between the alleged offense and the
Respondent's duties and responsibilities as a driver licensed by the
Commission;
         (b)   The Respondent's driving record, including any history of
serious violations or license suspension under these Rules or applicable
provisions of law relating to traffic or Vehicles licensed by the Commission;
         (c)   The Respondent's previous criminal record, or lack thereof;
         (d)   The Respondent's character and standing in the community; and
         (e)   Any other evidence relevant to whether continued licensure of
the Respondent during the pendency of criminal charges would pose a direct and
substantial threat to public health or safety.
      (6)   The Recommended Decision shall be rendered within ten (10) business
days from the close of the record of the Summary Suspension hearing. If the
Recommended Decision is not rendered within this deadline, the suspension will
immediately be lifted until the Chair's decision is rendered.
      (7)   The Chairperson can accept, reject, or modify the Recommended
Decision in a written decision that includes the reasons therefor. The
Chairperson may not reject or modify the Recommended Decision without setting
forth a reasonable basis for doing so.
      (8)   (i)   Except as further specified in subparagraph (ii) of this
paragraph, the Chairperson must render a decision on continued suspension
within twenty (20) calendar days of the date of the Recommended Decision, but
only after promptly providing the Respondent a copy of the Recommended Decision
and an opportunity to respond to the Recommended Decision within ten (10)
calendar days. If the Chairperson does not render a decision within the 20-day
period, the suspension must be lifted until such action is taken by the
Chairperson.
         (ii)   Within five (5) business days of receiving a Recommended
Decision recommending that the suspension be lifted, the Chairperson must: (i)
accept the recommendation and lift the suspension, or (ii) provide the
Respondent notice that the Recommended Decision may be rejected or modified,
and the reasons therefor, and ten (10) calendar days to respond in writing to
such notice. The Chair must render a decision within five (5) business days of
receiving a response from the Respondent to such notice. If the Chair fails to
meet these deadlines, the suspension will immediately be lifted until the
Chair's decision is rendered.
      (9)   Notwithstanding the procedures for lifting a suspension during the
pendency of criminal charges as set forth in this paragraph:
         (i)   Within one (1) business day of receipt of a certificate of
disposition indicating that the charges against the Respondent have been
dismissed, withdrawn, reduced to an offense not specified in paragraph (1) of
this subdivision, or otherwise disposed of in a similar manner, the Commission
must lift the suspension.
         (ii)   In all other cases, within five (5) business days of receiving
from the Respondent a certificate of disposition of the criminal charges, the
Commission must either lift the suspension or commence revocation proceedings.
(Amended City Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 12/9/
2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 5/11/2021, eff. 6/10/2021)
§ 68-16 Special Procedures – Summary Suspension Pending Compliance.
   (a)   Summary Suspension. If the Chairperson finds that the Licensee is not
in compliance with a rule in this title that provides for "summary suspension
until compliance," the Licensee's TLC-issued License can be summarily suspended
until compliance pending an opportunity to be heard.
   (b)   Notice to Licensee. The Commission will send a notice to the Licensee
(Respondent) by personal service or by USPS first class mail to the
Respondent's current Mailing Address with the following information:
      (1)   That the Respondent's TLC-issued License is being suspended for a
violation of the Commission's rules or applicable provision of the
Administrative Code.
      (2)   A description of the nature of the violation.
      (3)   That the Respondent's License will be suspended:
         (A)   Immediately upon service of the notice if made by personal
service; or
         (B)   Five days from the date of the mailing if the notice was sent by
USPS first class mail to the Respondent's current Mailing Address.
      (4)   That the Respondent has the right to an expedited hearing at the
OATH Tribunal by following the instructions contained in the notice and
responding:
         (A)   Within 10 calendar days from receiving the notice, if notice was
given by personal service; or
         (B)   Within 15 calendar days from the mailing of the notice of
suspension, if the notice was mailed.
   (c)   Respondent's Right to Expedited Hearing.
      (1)   Except as set forth in subdivision (d) of this section, any
Licensee whose License has been summarily suspended is entitled to an expedited
hearing at the OATH Tribunal, provided the Licensee or Respondent requests an
expedited hearing by notifying the Commission
         (A)   within 10 calendar days from receiving the notice referred to in
subdivision (b) of this section, if notice was given by personal service, or
         (B)   within 15 calendar days from the mailing of the notice of
suspension, if the notice was mailed.
      (2)   Scheduling a Summary Suspension Hearing.
         (A)   Upon receipt of a timely request for an expedited Hearing, the
Commission must request a Summary Suspension Hearing (or a Hearing on the
underlying violation) to be held within 10 calendar days of the Commission's
receipt of the request (if the tenth day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or
holiday, the hearing may be held on the next business day).
         (B)   The Summary Suspension hearing will be conducted according to
the hearing procedures established in 48 RCNY
Chapter 1.
      (3)   The decision in the Summary Suspension hearing will be a
Recommended Decision that includes findings of fact, conclusions of law, and a
recommendation as to continuation of the suspension.
      (4)   The decision of the Chairperson is the final determination of the
Commission with respect to the Summary Suspension.
      (5)   If the Chairperson does not render a decision within 60 calendar
days from the end of the Summary Suspension hearing, the suspension must be
lifted until the decision is rendered.
      (6)   Failure to Request an Expedited Hearing on the Suspension. If a
Respondent does not request an expedited Hearing within the time specified in
paragraph (1) of this subdivision, then all of the following apply:
         (A)   The Respondent is deemed to have waived the opportunity to be
heard on an expedited basis.
         (B)   The Respondent will be scheduled for a hearing on the underlying
violation in accordance with the normal procedures set forth in 48 RCNY
Chapter 1.
         (C)   The Summary Suspension will be continued until lifted by the
OATH ALJ in the hearing on the underlying violation or until the Licensee
furnishes proof of compliance satisfactory to the Chairperson.
   (d)   Respondent's Right to be Heard Through Written Documentation.
      (1)   Violation of Drug-Testing Rules. A Driver who fails to be timely
tested for drug use, in accordance with Subdivisions (c) or (d) of 35 RCNY §
80-14, and whose License is then summarily suspended, is not entitled to a
hearing, but can provide the Commission, within 10 calendar days of the notice
described in subdivision (b), with a single submission of written documentation
refuting the suspension of his or her License.
      (2)   Hearing Officer Review of Documentation. The Commission will submit
the documentation submitted by a Licensee refuting the Summary Suspension to
the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH which will then issue a decision
including findings of fact and conclusions of law. This decision can be
appealed in accordance with the process established in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5.
      (3)   Failure to Submit Documentation. If the Driver does not timely
submit written documentation refuting the Summary Suspension, the opportunity
to be heard is waived and the Driver will be deemed to be guilty of the
violation.
   (e)   Continuation of a Suspension. The TLC will reinstate the License of
any Licenses suspended under this section after the Licensee pays all fines
assessed and complies with the underlying Commission rule or Administrative
Code provision to the satisfaction of the Chairperson or his or her designee.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 10/12/
2018, eff. 11/11/2018)
§ 68-17 Special Procedures – Seizures.
   (a)   Right to Seize Vehicle.
      1.   The Commission and/or any police officer may seize any vehicle
where:
         (A)   Probable cause exists to believe that the vehicle is being
operated in violation of § 19-506(b), (c), or (k) of the Administrative Code,
or is being operated as a Commuter Van without Authorization; and
         (B)   At the time of the stop, the Owner has at least one prior
violation of § 19-506(b), (c), or (k) of the Administrative Code in the past 36
months (or in the case of an Owner of a Commuter Van, one prior violation for
operating a Commuter Van without Authorization in the past five years), thereby
making the vehicle potentially subject to forfeiture according to 35 RCNY §
68-18.
      2.   The driver and all passengers in a seized Commuter Van will be left
in or transported to a location that is readily accessible to other means of
public transportation.
      3.   Any vehicle that has been seized will be taken to a designated
secured facility.
   (b)   Procedure After Seizure.
      1.   The officer or representative of the Commission seizing the vehicle
will serve a summons for Unlicensed Activity and a notice of seizure of the
vehicle by service upon the Owner or any person who is operating the vehicle
with the permission of the Owner, express or implied, at the time of seizure.
The notice of seizure will include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         (A)   Identification of the seized vehicle;
         (B)   Information concerning these regulations, including the facts
TLC must prove in order to retain possession of the vehicle pending forfeiture;
         (C)   The designated secured facility to which the vehicle was or will
be taken.
      2.   The summons against the Owner will set a date and time for a hearing
at the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH to take place no later than 5
business days following seizure of a vehicle.
      3.   An officer or representative of the Commission will also mail the
notice of seizure and a copy of the summons to the Owner of the seized vehicle,
as listed in the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles (or equivalent
agency) in the state in which the vehicle is registered.
         (A)   The notice of seizure and copy of the summons will be mailed to
the Owner of a seized Commuter Van within 1 business day.
         (B)   Any defect in delivery or mailing of the notice of seizure and
copy of the summons will not affect the validity of service of a summons served
upon the Owner in accordance with paragraph (1) of this subdivision.
      4.   For purposes of this section, the term Owner means:
         (A)   An Owner as defined in section 128 and section 388 of the
Vehicle and Traffic Law, unless the vehicle is a Commuter Van;
         (B)   If the vehicle is a Commuter Van, the term Owner when used in
this section means an Owner as defined in subdivision (i) of § 19-502 of the
Administrative Code.
   (c)   Hearing on Unlicensed Activity. 
      1.   The hearing against the Owner will be conducted at the OATH Hearings
Division according to the procedures in 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 within five business days following a seizure. At the hearing, a
determination will be made on the following:
         (A)   Whether the Owner engaged in the Unlicensed Activity alleged in
the summons.
         (B)   If the Owner is found to have engaged in such Unlicensed
Activity, then:
            (i)   Whether the Owner has two or more violations of § 19-506(b),
(c), or (k) of the Administrative Code in the past 36 months or two or more
violations for operating a Commuter Van without Authorization in the past five
years; and
            (ii)   Whether it is necessary that the vehicle remain impounded
pending i a judgment of forfeiture.
      2.   A determination in a case of Unlicensed Activity with a Commuter Van
will be issued within 1 business day of the conclusion of the hearing or
Default.
      3.   If a new hearing is required (e.g., because a default decision has
been vacated) and TLC continues to maintain possession of Owner's vehicle, the
hearing must be held no later than 14 days after the decision triggering the
new hearing.
   (d)   Hearing Decision. 
      (1)   Not Guilty Finding. If the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH
finds that the charge of Unlicensed Activity has not been sustained, the
vehicle will be released to the Owner. The Owner will be responsible for any
storage fees that accrue after one full business day following the date of the
order of vehicle release.
      (2)   Guilty Finding. If the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH finds
that the vehicle has been engaged in Unlicensed Activity, and:
         (A)   TLC has met all the requirements of 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(B), TLC will retain the vehicle and commence a forfeiture action
according to 35 RCNY §
68-18.
         (B)   TLC has not met the requirements of 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(B)(i), TLC will release the vehicle to the Owner upon payment of
applicable penalties. The Owner will be responsible for any storage fees that
accrue after one full business day following the date of the order of vehicle
release.
         (C)   TLC has not met the requirements of 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(B)(ii), TLC will release the vehicle to the Owner upon payment of
applicable penalties and all removal and storage fees.
   (e)   Appeal. 
      (1)   If the determination required by 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(A) or 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(B)(i) is reversed, the Owner will be responsible for any storage
fees that accrue after one full business day following the date of the order of
vehicle release.
      (2)   If the determination required by 35 RCNY §
68-17(c)(1)(B)(ii), is reversed the vehicle will be released to the Owner upon
payment of applicable penalties and all removal and storage fees.
   (f)   Declaration of abandonment. 
      (1)   Recovery Period. If an Owner has not tried to reclaim a seized
vehicle within 120 days after receiving an order of vehicle release from the
Commission, or within 120 days after being served notice of a final
determination in the Owner's favor, whichever is sooner, the vehicle will be
declared abandoned.
      (2)   Disposing of Vehicle. An abandoned vehicle will be disposed of by
the City or its agent according to section 1224 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic
Law. If an Owner seeks to reclaim the abandoned vehicle under section 1224, the
Owner will be deemed to have made a written demand for the vehicle and the
Commission will take whichever action is authorized by this section.
         (A)   In the event that a vehicle has been deemed abandoned, the
Commission or its agent will:
            (i)   Mail notice to the Owner and any Secondary Owners that the
vehicle has been declared abandoned and that, unless claimed within 10 days of
the mailing date of the letter, the vehicle will become the property of the
Commission and will be sold.
            (ii)   The Owner or any Secondary Owner can claim the vehicle by
paying the removal and storage fees due and, in the case of the Owner, the
civil penalty claimed that is now a lien on the vehicle.
            (iii)   If the vehicle is not claimed within the allotted time, the
Commission or its agent can sell the vehicle by public auction or by bid.
         (B)   Disposition of the Proceeds from the Sale of the Vehicle. 
            (i)   Proceeds from any sale, minus expenses incurred for removal,
storage and sale of the vehicle and minus the civil penalty lien, will be held
without interest for the benefit of the former Owner of the vehicle for 1 year.
            (ii)   If these proceeds are not claimed within the 1-year period,
they will be paid into the City's general fund.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City
Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/
2023)
§ 68-18 Special Procedures – Forfeitures.
   (a)   For purposes of this section, the term Owner means:
      (1)   An Owner as defined in section 128 and section 388 of the Vehicle
and Traffic Law, unless the vehicle is a Commuter Van;
      (2)   If the vehicle is a Commuter Van, the term Owner when used in this
section means an Owner as defined in subdivision (i) of § 19-502 of the
Administrative Code.
   (b)   A vehicle seized under the provision of subdivision (a) of 35 RCNY §
68-17 is subject to forfeiture if either of the following are true:
      (1)   The Owner has been found to have committed two or more violations
of subdivisions (b), (c) or (k) of § 19-506 of the Administrative Code within
36 months; or
      (2)   Owner has been found to have committed two or more violations of
operating a Commuter Van without Authorization within 5 years.
   (c)   A forfeiture action must be commenced within 45 days of a final agency
determination that a seized vehicle is subject to forfeiture and in accordance
with the New York Civil Practice Law and Rules, and, in the case of seized
Commuter Vans, § 19-529.3 of the Administrative Code.
   (d)   Rights of Secondary Owners (Other than Commuter Vans). 
      (1)   A Secondary Owner who wishes to assert an ownership claim to the
vehicle but does not participate in the forfeiture proceeding must submit a
claim in writing to the Commission within 30 days after the judicial
determination of forfeiture.
      (2)   If a Secondary Owner submits the claim, the Commission will
schedule a hearing at the OATH Tribunal and will mail notice to the claimant at
least 10 business days before the hearing.
      (3)   A Secondary Owner that establishes a right of ownership or other
legal interest in the vehicle (other than an owner whose interest has been
forfeited) can recover the vehicle, provided such person or entity:
         (A)   Redeems the ownership interest which was subject to forfeiture,
by paying the city the value of that interest; and
         (B)   Pays the reasonable expenses for the safekeeping of the vehicle
from the time of seizure and redemption.
      (4)   A Secondary Owner that establishes a right of ownership in the
hearing is not entitled to recovery of the vehicle if TLC establishes that the
violations upon which forfeiture is predicated were expressly or impliedly
permitted by such Secondary Owner.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 68-19 Special Procedures – Removal and Storage Fees for Seized Vehicles.
   (a)   Removal Fee. The removal fee for all vehicles is one hundred eighty-
five dollars ($185).
   (b)   Storage Fee.
      (1)   The storage fee for vehicles seized for unlicensed Taxicab,
Paratransit, or For-Hire activity will be the fee set by the New York City
Police Department or such other agency as may store the vehicles.
      (2)   The storage fee for vehicles seized for unlicensed Commuter Van
activity is fifteen dollars ($15) per day.
§ 68-20 Special Procedures – Settlements and Withdrawals.
   (a)   Settlements. The Chairperson and a Respondent may dispose of a summons
by entering into a settlement agreement.
      (1)   The settlement agreement must be in writing.
      (2)   The settlement agreement may provide for penalties different than
the penalties provided for in these Rules.
      (3)   The settlement agreement may provide for canceling an adjudication
that is open or that has been completed. If the adjudication is open or
completed before the OATH Tribunal, the Chairperson will promptly notify the
tribunal.
      (4)   The settlement agreement may provide for penalties to be imposed,
with or without a further hearing, if the Respondent does not comply with the
terms of the settlement agreement.
      (5)   Unless the settlement agreement explicitly provides otherwise, the
License of a Respondent who does not comply with the terms of the settlement
agreement may be suspended by the Chairperson without a hearing until the
Respondent complies with the settlement agreement.
      (6)   By entering into a settlement agreement, the Chairperson and the
Respondent both waive their rights to any further hearings or appeals on the
summons or notice of violation that is disposed of by the settlement agreement.
   (b)   Withdrawals.
      (1)   The Chairperson may withdraw a summons, even if it has been
adjudicated, if the Chairperson determines that it was:
         (i)   Written in error,
         (ii)   Ineffectively served on the Respondent,or
         (iii)   Written in contravention of the Chairperson's enforcement
policy.
      (2)   If the Chairperson withdraws a summons:
         (i)   Any fine, suspension, revocation, or Persistent Violator Points
or Penalty Points imposed after the hearing will be vacated.
         (ii)   Any fines paid will be refunded.
         (iii)   The Chairperson will notify the Respondent that the summons
has been withdrawn.
         (iv)   If a withdrawn summons is open or has been completed before the
OATH Tribunal, the Chairperson shall promptly notify the tribunal.
(Amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
Chapter 70: Transition Rules
§ 70-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To repeal existing TLC rules:
   (b)   To promulgate new TLC rules of which this chapter is part;
   (c)   To provide for a transition from the existing rules to the new rules;
   (d)   To set forth the general purpose that actions taken under the existing
rules remain effective when the new rules take effect, a purpose which is to be
construed broadly.
§ 70-02 Penalties.
This chapter is informational in nature and does not provide for any penalties.
§ 70-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Activation Date. The Activation Date is April 1, 2011.
   (b)   New Rules. 
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York and any amendments that become
effective on and after the Activation Date.
   (c)   Old Rules. 
Title 35 of the Rules of the City of New York as in effect before the
Activation Date.
§ 70-04 Rules.
   (a)   Old Rules. The Old Rules are repealed on the Activation Date.
   (b)   New Rules. The New Rules become effective and binding on the
Activation Date.
§ 70-05 Existing Licenses.
   (a)   Existing Licenses. All Licenses issued by the Commission and Valid at
the Activation Date continue in existence.
   (b)   Obligation to follow New Rules. All Licensees must obey the New Rules
beginning on the Activation Date. It does not matter when a License was issued
or when the License expires. A Licensee will be responsible for his or her
conduct as a Licensee under the New Rules beginning on the Activation Date.
   (c)   Old Rules are no defense to ongoing obligations. No person can raise
as a defense to a violation of the New Rules from the Activation Date either
the existence of the Old Rules before the Activation Date or that a License was
issued under the Old Rules.
   (d)   License Terms-Expiration.
      (1)   A License Valid and in effect on the Activation Date expires on the
date it was scheduled to expire when issued under the Old Rules.
      (2)   A License suspended on the Activation Date expires on the date it
was scheduled to expire when issued under the Old Rules.
   (e)   License Renewals. When a License expires on or after the Activation
Date, the New Rules apply to any application to renew that License.
§ 70-06 License Applications.
   (a)   License Applications received before the Activation Date. License
applications received before the Activation Date will be processed under the
Old Rules. However, for any such License, the Licensee must follow the New
Rules beginning on the Activation Date.
   (b)   License Applications received after the Activation Date. License
applications received on and after the Activation Date will be processed under
the New Rules.
§ 70-07 Persistence of Enforcement Actions.
   (a)   Summonses.
      (1)   All summonses written and outstanding under the Old Rules remain
valid at the Activation Date. Charges in the summonses will be adjudicated
under the Old Rules.
      (2)   All summonses written beginning on the Activation Date will be
written under the New Rules. Charges in the summonses will be adjudicated under
the New Rules.
      (3)   No summons can be dismissed on or after the Activation Date on the
ground that it was written under the Old Rules for conduct that occurred before
the Activation Date.
   (b)   Outstanding Fines and Penalties.
      (1)   Fines, penalties and debts owed to the Commission on the Activation
Date for violations of any rule or duty continue to be due and payable until
paid.
      (2)   Any fine, penalty or debt imposed on or after the Activation Date
resulting from a summons written under the Old Rules for conduct that occurred
before the Activation Date will be due and payable until paid.
   (c)   Suspensions.
      (1)   Any License suspension which has gone into effect before the
Activation Date remains in effect beginning on the Activation Date and must be
served until the terms of the suspension are satisfied.
      (2)   Any suspension imposed under the Old Rules which goes into effect
beginning on or after the Activation Date must be served until the terms of the
suspension are satisfied.
      (3)   The Activation Date will not affect the end date of any suspension.
   (d)   Hearing Schedules. The Activation Date will not affect the date of any
Hearing or other action scheduled before the Commission's Adjudications
Tribunal or OATH
   (e)   Directives and Notices to Correct.
      (1)   Any directive or notice to correct issued by the Commission before
the Activation Date remains in effect on the Activation Date and until complied
with.
      (2)   Penalties for violation of any directive or notice to correct
issued before the Activation Date will be imposed under the Old Rules.
   (f)   Outstanding Points for Drivers, Vehicle Owners, and Bases.
      (1)   All points issued as penalties by the Commission under any of the
Persistent Violator or Critical Driver Programs, or as Penalty Points to owners
of For-Hire Vehicles or Bases and accumulated against any License on the
Activation Date remain in effect.
      (2)   Any points issued and accumulated on and after the Activation Date
as a result of summonses issued under the Old Rules will be added to any
accumulated points.
      (3)   Any action to suspend or revoke any License under any accumulated
point program initiated on or after the Activation Date will be governed by the
New Rules.
      (4)   In any action to suspend or revoke, the Commission will consider
points accumulated within the period specified by applicable rules. Points
accumulated against a License both before and on and after the Activation Date
will be considered.
   (g)   Cumulative Penalties. When penalties are affected by the number of
times a person has been convicted of that violation, convictions for prior
offenses under the Old Rules count toward second and subsequent offense
penalties under the New Rules.
Chapter 75: Rules for Authorization of Taxicab Technology Service Providers
[Repealed]
§ 75-01 Scope of the Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-02 Non-Compliance with Conditions of Authorization. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-04 Authorization – General Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-05 Authorization – Specific Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-06 Authorization – Financial Disclosure. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-07 Authorization – Fees and Term of Authorization. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-08 Authorization – Cause for Denial. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-09 General Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Unauthorized
Activity. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-10 General Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Compliance with
Applicable Law. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-11 General Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Indemnification.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-12 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Premises.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-13 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Signage.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-14 General Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Notice to TLC.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-15 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Mailing and Email
Address. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-16 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Change in
Business Ownership. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-17 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Fees Charged by
Providers. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-18 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Sale, Lease or
Use of TPEP. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-19 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Contract with
Medallion Owner. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-20 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Maintenance of
TPEP. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-21 Business Requirements for Maintaining Authorization – Compliance with
TPEP Requirements and Service Levels. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-22 Business Requirements – Recordkeeping and Reporting Requirements.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-23 Business Requirements – Use of Personal Information and Certain
Location-Based Data. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-24 Business Requirements – Cooperation with the Commission. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; repealed City Record 5/17/
2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 75-25 Technical Requirements – Taxicab Technology System (TPEP). [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 3/4/2016, eff. 4/3/2016; amended City Record 4/28/2016,
eff. 5/28/2016; amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; amended City
Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/
2018)
Chapter 76: Information Security Rules for Taxicab Technology Service Providers
[Repealed]
§ 76-01 Scope of the Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 76-02 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 76-03 Information Security Requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
Chapter 77: Licensing and Rules for Dispatch Service Providers [Repealed]
§ 77-01 Scope of the Chapter. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-02 Penalties. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-04 Licensing – General Requirements. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-05 Licensing – Specific Requirements. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-06 Licensing – Bond Required. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-07 Licensing – Fees and Term of License. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; repealed City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-08 Licensing – Cause for Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-09 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-10 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-11 General Requirements – Indemnification. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-12 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-13 General Requirements – Notice to TLC. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-14 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-15 Business Requirements – Fees Charged by Dispatch Service Provider
Licensees. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-16 Business Requirements – Provision of Dispatch Services. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-17 Business Requirements – Cooperation with the Commission. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-18 Business Requirements – Dispatch Service Provider Liability for Conduct
of Employees. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-19 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; repealed City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 77-20 Technical Requirements – Provision of Dispatch Service. [Repealed]
(Added City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 7/7/2016,
eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City
Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
Chapter 78: Licensing and Rules for Providers of E-Hail Applications
§ 78-01 Scope of the Chapter.
   (a)   To establish a formal procedure for the licensing and supervision of
businesses that sell, lease, or make available for use, software programs which
are E-Hail Applications that reside on smartphones or other electronic devices.
   (b)   To establish technical requirements for the E-Hail Applications which
must be met in order for E-Hail Application Providers to apply for and obtain a
license.
   (c)   To establish services to be provided by E-Hail Application Providers
for the benefit of individuals and businesses licensed by TLC and the public.
   (d)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these rules.
§ 78-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any service regulated by this chapter by:
         (i)   Any E-Hail Application Provider Licensee whose License is
suspended, revoked, or expired and not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any entity that does not hold a Valid License from the
Commission for an E-Hail Application.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
35 RCNY §  
78-09 and can result in License suspension, revocation, and other penalties.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they will be shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section will also
state whether the violator must attend a Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due within 30 days of the day the Respondent is found
guilty of the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
OATH Hearings Division within the time required by 48  RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred 30 days
after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Non-Renewal of License; Suspension; Revocation.
      (1)   Non-Renewal of License.
         (i)   If an E-Hail Application Provider License is not timely renewed,
the E-Hail Application Provider must immediately notify each Licensee who is
using the E-Hail Application approved under the expired License that the
License has expired and that the Licensee must terminate usage of the E-Hail
Application.
         (ii)   Upon expiration of the E-Hail Application Provider License, the
E-Hail Application Provider must not enroll any further Licensees into the
previously licensed E-Hail Application approved under the expired License.
         (iii)   Upon expiration of the E-Hail Application Provider License,
the E-Hail Application Provider must immediately cease offering the E-Hail
Application for use to any Licensee or to the public for pickup requests in New
York City.
      (2)   Suspension.
         (i)   If an E-Hail Application Provider's License has been suspended
by the Commission, the E-Hail Application Provider must immediately notify each
Licensee who is using the E-Hail Application approved under the suspended
License:
            •   Of the dates during which the License is suspended, and
            •   that the Licensee must terminate usage of the E-Hail
Application for the duration of such suspension.
         (ii)   Upon suspension of the E-Hail Application Provider License, the
Provider must not enroll any further Licensees into the E-Hail Application
approved under the suspended License for the duration of such suspension, and
must immediately, for the duration of such suspension, cease offering the E-
Hail Application for use to any already enrolled Licensee or to the public for
pickup requests in New York City.
      (3)   Revocation.
         (i)   If an E-Hail Application Provider's License has been revoked by
the Commission, the E-Hail Application Provider must immediately notify each
Licensee who is using the E-Hail Application approved under the revoked License
that:
            •   its service agreement with the E-Hail Application Provider will
be deemed terminated as of the date of License revocation, and
            •   the Licensee must not continue to use the E-Hail Application.
         (ii)   Upon revocation of the E-Hail Application Provider's License,
the Provider must not enroll any further Licensees into the E-Hail Application
approved under the revoked License.
         (iii)   An E-Hail Application Provider whose License has been revoked
must cease offering use of the E-Hail Application approved under the revoked
License to any Licensees or to the public for pickup requests in New York City.

 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $1,000 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-02(d)
 
(Amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 78-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this Chapter means an Applicant for an original or
renewal E-Hail Application Provider License.
   (b)   Credit, Debit, and Prepaid Card Services. The portion of the E-Hail
Application used to process Passenger payment of fare in a Vehicle by credit,
debit, or prepaid card as described in 35 RCNY §
78-21(b) and (c).
   (c)   Database Management System. A software package with computer programs
that control the creation, maintenance and use of a database.
   (d)   Dispatch and Pay has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (e)   E-Hail has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (f)   E-Hail App Data. All data required to be collected, transmitted and
maintained pursuant to this Agreement. E-Hail App Data includes, but is not
limited to, Trip Data as described in 35 RCNY §
78-21, data related to credit, debit, and prepaid card transactions, and data
relating to E-Hail App usage. Any data that is transferred to the E-Hail App by
Technology Systems become E-Hail App Data once received by the E-Hail App.
   (g)   E-Hail Application has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (h)   E-Hail Application Provider is a person or entity licensed by these
Rules to offer an E-Hail Application.
   (i)   E-Hail Application Provider License is a license issued to a E-Hail
Application Provider pursuant to this Chapter.
   (j)   E-Payment has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (k)   Hail has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (l)   Hail and Pay has the same meaning as the same term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (m)   Information System. An interconnected set of information resources
under the same direct management control that shares common functionality.
   (n)   License. When the term "License" is used by itself in this Chapter –
and in this Chapter ONLY – it refers to an E-Hail Application Provider License.
   (o)   Modification of E-Hail Application. Any modification to the E-Hail
Application or related services after the Commission has issued a License for
such E-Hail Application that would materially alter any of the following:
      (1)   functionality, performance characteristics, security measures, or
technical environment of the E-Hail Application or related services;
      (2)   interfaces to the Technology System, or to the Software, Hardware,
network, or other E-Hail Application components;
      (3)   the manner in which the E-Hail Application or related services are
provided. The addition or modification of a component allowing payment through
the E-Hail Application constitutes a Modification. A Modification of E-Hail
Application does not include:
      (4)   fixes and/or maintenance patches necessary to conform the E-Hail
Application or any of its components or related services to the requirements
set forth in 35 RCNY §
78-21; and
      (5)   security patches to the extent such fixes or patches are necessary
in the E-Hail Application Provider's good faith judgment to maintain the
continuity of the E-Hail Application or related services or to correct an event
or occurrence that would, if uncorrected, substantially prevent, hinder or
delay proper operation of the E-Hail Application or related services.
   (p)   Non-consumer User. Any individual, excluding a cardholder, who
accesses Database Management System components, including, but not limited to
employees, administrators and third parties.
   (q)   Pair. The act of an E-Hail Application connecting to a Technology
System for the purposes of Hail and Pay.
   (r)   PCI Standards. The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standards
issued by the Payment Card Industry Security Standards Council as they may
change from time to time. See www.pcisecuritystandards.org 
   (s)   Personal Information has the same meaning as the term as it is defined
in New York General Business Law § 899-aa(1)(a) and includes such information
pertaining to passengers and drivers.
   (t)   Service Levels. The standards of performance of the E-Hail Application
and its components that are described in 35 RCNY §§
78-17 and
78-21.
   (u)   Security Incident or Incident means the attempted or successful
unauthorized access, use, disclosure, modification, or destruction of
information or interference with system operations in an Information System.
   (v)   Technology System Data. All data required to be collected, transmitted
and maintained pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-24 and other information assets related to the Technology System Data.
Technology System Data includes, but is not limited to, Trip Data, data related
to credit, debit and prepaid card transactions, and text messages and the date
and time such messages were sent and received. Any data that is transferred to
the Technology System by E-Hail Apps that provide E-Payment become Technology
System Data once received by the Technology System.
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 78-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   E-Hail Application Licensees. An Applicant for an E-Hail Application
Provider License or its renewal may be an individual or a Business Entity.
   (b)   License for Each E-Hail Application. An application for a new or
renewal E-Hail Application Provider License must be filed for each E-Hail
Application for which Commission approval is sought. A separate E-Hail
Application Provider License will be issued or renewed for each approved E-Hail
Application. All License requirements of this Chapter apply to each License to
be issued or renewed. An application for an E-Hail Application License must
include (and the License for the E-Hail Application must include) any payment
feature linked to the E-Hail Application whether or not the E-Hail Application
Provider provides the feature. The E-Hail Application, combined with the
feature, must meet all requirements for E-Payment.
   (c)   Certification. Any new or renewal application for an E-Hail
Application Provider License must be filed on a form approved by the
Chairperson. The Applicant must swear (or affirm) that the information in the
application is true, under penalty of perjury.
   (d)   Proof of Identity. The individual or Business Entity Person submitting
the application for an E-Hail Application Provider License must provide to the
Commission proof of identity in the form of a valid photo identification issued
by the United States, a state or territory of the United States, or any
political subdivision of a state or territory of the United States.
   (e)   Age. The individual or Business Entity Person submitting an
application for an E-Hail Application Provider License or its renewal must be
at least 18 years of age.
   (f)   Fit to Hold a License. An Applicant applying for an E-Hail Application
Provider License or its renewal must demonstrate that they are Fit to Hold a
License.
   (g)   Partnership Filings. When the Applicant is a partnership, it must file
with its License application a certified copy of the partnership certificate
from the clerk of the county where the principal place of business is located.
   (h)   Corporate or LLC Filings. When the Applicant is a corporation, it must
file with its License application all of the following:
      (1)   One of the following certificates:
         (i)   A certified copy of its certificate(s) of incorporation with a
filing receipt issued by the secretary of state if the Applicant was
incorporated less than one year from the date of the License application
         (ii)   A certificate of good standing if the Applicant was
incorporated more than one year from the date of the License application
         (iii)   A copy of the certificate of incorporation, filing receipt,
and authority to do business within the State of New York if the Applicant is
an out-of-state corporation
      (2)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs). When the Applicant is a limited
liability company, it must file with its application the following:
         (i)   A copy of its articles of organization
         (i)   Uniqueness of Name. The Commission has the right to reject the
proposed name of any E-Hail Application Provider that the Commission finds to
be substantially similar to any name in use by another E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee.
   (j)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Consumer Affairs,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau, and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
   (k)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address as required by 35 RCNY §
78-14.
§ 78-05 Licensing – Specific Requirements.
   (a)   E-Hail Application Approval for New License. The Commission will not
issue an E-Hail Application Provider License to any Applicant unless the
Commission approves the E-Hail Application proposed for sale, lease or use by
the Applicant. In determining whether to approve the E-Hail Application, the
Commission will consider, in its sole discretion, whether the documentation
required to be submitted by the Applicant pursuant to subdivision (b) of this
section adequately demonstrates that the E-Hail Application complies with all
of the requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §
78-21, or as such requirements may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section.
   (b)   Documentation for E-Hail Application Approval. The Applicant must
submit with its License application a detailed description of its E-Hail
Application's functionality and its compliance with the requirements set forth
in 35 RCNY §
78-21, as well a list of all third-party designees the E-Hail Application
Provider will use in offering E-Hail or E-Payment services. If the Application
includes E-Payment, the Applicant must submit with its License application the
documentation described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subdivision. All
documentation pertaining to an independent third party must be accompanied by a
signed authorization from the Applicant authorizing the Commission to contact
the independent third party directly and authorizing the independent third
party to respond to inquiries from the Commission.
      (1)   Documentation demonstrating that an independent third party that is
accredited by the American National Standards Institute-American Society of
Quality National Accreditation Board ("ANAB") to perform International
Organization for Standardization ("ISO") 9001 certifications has performed
acceptance testing consistent with the acceptance test plan, and the successful
results of the acceptance testing; and
      (2)   Documentation demonstrating that an independent third party that is
a Qualified Security Assessor ("QSA") company has performed security testing of
the E-Hail Application and related services to determine compliance with the
security standards set forth in 35 RCNY §
78-21(f), or as such standards may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to subdivision (f) of this section, and the successful results of the
security testing; and
      (3)   Documentation, demonstrating that a qualified, independent third
party has performed acceptance testing of the E-Hail company's Application
Programming Interface and related services to determine compliance with the
standards set forth in 35 RCNY § 78-24(d)(2), or as such standards may be
waived or modified by the Commission pursuant to subdivision (e) of this
section, and the successful results of such acceptance testing.
   (c)   Information Security and Use of Personal Information Policy. The
Applicant must submit with its License application an information security and
use of personal information policy that includes, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   a statement of internal access policies relating to passenger and
driver Personal Information for employees, contractors, and third party access,
if applicable;
      (2)   a statement that, except to the extent necessary to provide credit,
debit, and prepaid card services and services for any application that provides
for electronic payment, Personal Information will only be collected and used
with such passenger's affirmative express consent and that such personal
information will not be used, shared, or disclosed, except for lawful purposes;
      (3)   procedures for notifying the Commission and affected parties of any
breach of the security of the system, pursuant to section 899-aa of the General
Business Law;
      (4)   a statement that any credit, debit, or prepaid card information
collected by the Applicant or a credit, debit, or prepaid card services
provider is processed by the Applicant or such provider in compliance with
applicable payment card industry standards, and
      (5)   a statement of the Applicant's policies regarding the use of
passenger geolocation information, which must include, at a minimum, a
prohibition on the use, monitoring, or disclosure of trip information,
including the date, time, pick-up location, drop-off location, and real-time
vehicle location and any retained vehicle location records, without such
passenger's affirmative express consent.
   (d)   Modification of E-Hail Application. If after the E-Hail Application
Provider License is issued pursuant to this Chapter, the E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee wants to implement a Modification, the E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee must submit an application for approval of a Modification of
E-Hail Application by submitting all documentation required by subdivision (b)
of this section and the fee required in 35 RCNY §
78-07(b). The Commission will treat the submission as an application for a new
E-Hail Application Provider License. If the Commission approves the
Modification, the existing E-Hail Application Provider License will apply to
the modified E-Hail Application.
   (e)   Required Insurance. After submission of an application for a new E-
Hail Application Provider License, an Applicant must provide to the Commission
proof of the insurance required in this subdivision when the Commission
requests it. Upon submission of an application to renew an E-Hail Application
Provider License, the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must provide to the
Commission proof of the insurance required in this subdivision.
      (1)   Commercial General Liability Insurance.
         (i)   The Applicant must maintain Commercial General Liability ("CGL")
Insurance covering the Applicant as Named Insured and the City as an Additional
Insured in the amount of at least Five Million Dollars ($5,000,000) per
occurrence. The insurance must protect the City and the Applicant from claims
for property damage and/or bodily injury, including death that may arise from
any of the operations performed or to be performed by or on behalf of the
Applicant in connection with any of the activities licensed under this Chapter.
Coverage under this insurance must be at least as broad as that provided by the
most recently issued Insurance Services Office ("ISO") Form CG 0001, and must
be "occurrence" based rather than "claims-made."
         (ii)   If the Applicant's subcontractor(s) is/are performing or will
perform operations in connection with any of the activities licensed under this
Chapter, either the Applicant's CGL Insurance under subparagraph (i) of this
paragraph must cover the subcontractor(s) or such subcontractor(s) must
maintain its/their own CGL Insurance subject to all other requirements herein.
         (iii)   The CGL Insurance must name the City, together with its
officials and employees, as an Additional Insured with coverage at least as
broad as the most recently issued ISO Form CG20 10.
      (2)   Professional Liability Insurance.
         (i)   In the Commission's discretion, if professional services will be
performed by the Applicant in connection with any of the activities licensed
under this Chapter, the Applicant must maintain and submit evidence of
Professional Liability ("PL") Insurance appropriate to the type(s) of services
performed by the Applicant in the amount of at least One Million Dollars
($1,000,000) per claim. The policy or policies must include an endorsement to
cover the liability assumed by the Applicant under this Chapter arising out of
the negligent performance of professional services or caused by an error,
omission or negligent act of the Applicant or anyone employed by the Applicant.
         (ii)   If the Applicant's subcontractor(s) is/are performing or will
perform professional services in connection with any of the activities licensed
under this Chapter for which PL Insurance is reasonably commercially available,
either the Applicant's PL Insurance under subparagraph (i) of this paragraph
must cover the subcontractor(s) or such subcontractor(s) must maintain its/
their own PL Insurance subject to all other requirements herein.
         (iii)   Claims-made policies will be accepted for Professional
Liability Insurance. The policies must have an extended reporting period option
or automatic coverage of not less than two (2) years. If available as an
option, the Applicant must purchase extended reporting period coverage
effective on cancellation or termination of the insurance unless a new policy
is secured with a retroactive date, including at least the last policy year.
      (3)   Crime Insurance.
         (i)   The Applicant must maintain crime insurance to protect against
employee dishonesty, covering tangible property or moneys against loss, damage
or destruction resulting from larceny, theft, embezzlement, forgery, robbery,
misappropriation, willful misapplication or other fraudulent or dishonest acts
committed by the Applicant's employees or agents. The liability limits under
the policy must be at least One Million Dollars ($1,000,000) per occurrence.
         (ii)   If the Applicant's subcontractor(s) is/are performing or will
perform operations in connection with any of the activities licensed under this
Chapter, either the Applicant's crime insurance under item (i) above must cover
the subcontractor(s) employees or agents or such subcontractor(s) must maintain
its/their own crime insurance subject to all other requirements herein.
      (4)   General Requirements for Insurance Coverage and Policies.
         (i)   All required insurance policies must be maintained with
companies that may lawfully issue the required policy and have an A.M. Best
rating of at least A- / "VII" or a Standard and Poor's rating of at least A,
unless prior written approval is obtained from the Commission.
         (ii)   All insurance policies must be primary (and non-contributing)
to any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the City.
         (iii)   The Applicant must be solely responsible for the payment of
all premiums for all required insurance policies and all deductibles or self-
insured retentions to which the policies are subject, whether or not the City
is an insured under the policy.
         (iv)   There must be no self-insurance program with regard to any
insurance required under this subdivision unless approved in writing by the
Commission. Any self-insurance program must provide the City with all rights
that would be provided by traditional insurance required under this
subdivision, including but not limited to the defense obligations that insurers
are required to undertake in liability policies.
         (v)   The City's limits of coverage for all types of insurance
required under this subdivision must be the greater of:
            (A)   the minimum limits set forth in this subdivision; or
            (B)   the limits provided to the Applicant as Named Insured under
all primary, excess, and umbrella policies of that type of coverage.
      (5)   Proof of Insurance.
         (i)   For each policy required under this subdivision, the Applicant
must file with the Commission a Declarations Page issued by the insurer. All
Declaration Pages must be:
            (A)   in a form acceptable to the Commission and certify the
issuance and effectiveness of such policies of insurance, each with the
specified minimum limits;
            (B)   accompanied by the endorsement in the Applicant's Commercial
General Liability Insurance policy by which the City has been made an
Additional Insured pursuant to subparagraph (iii) of paragraph (1) of this
subdivision; and
            (C)   accompanied by either a duly executed "Certification by
Insurer" in the form provided by the Commission or copies of all policies
referenced in the Declarations Page. If complete policies have not yet been
issued, binders are acceptable, until the complete policies have been issued,
at which time such policies must be submitted.
         (ii)   The Applicant must provide the Commission with a copy of any
policy required under this subdivision upon demand by the Commission or the New
York City Law Department.
         (iii)   Acceptance by the Commission of a Declarations Page or a
policy does not excuse the E-Hail Application Provider from maintaining
policies consistent with all provisions of this subdivision (and ensuring that
subcontractors maintain such policies) or from any liability arising from its
failure to do so.
         (iv)   If the E-Hail Application Provider receives notice, from an
insurance company or other person, that any insurance policy required under
this subdivision will expire, be cancelled, or terminated for any reason, the
E-Hail Application Provider must immediately forward a copy of the notice to
the Commission and the New York City Comptroller at:
            NYC Taxi and Limousine Commission
            Attn: General Counsel 33 Beaver Street 22nd Floor
            New York, New York 10004
            New York City Comptroller
            Attn: Office of Contract Administration
            Municipal Building, One Centre Street, Room 1005
            New York, New York 10007.
      (6)   Miscellaneous Insurance Provisions.
         (i)   Whenever notice of loss, damage, occurrence, accident, claim or
suit is required under a Commercial General Liability policy maintained in
accordance with this subdivision, the E-Hail Application Provider must provide
the insurer with timely notice thereof on behalf of the City. Notice must be
given even where the E-Hail Application Provider may not have coverage under
such policy (for example, where one of the E-Hail Application Provider's
employees was injured). Notice must expressly specify that "this notice is
being given on behalf of the City of New York as Additional Insured" and
contain the following information:
            •   the number of the insurance policy;
            •   the name of the named insured;
            •   the date and location of the damage, occurrence, or accident;
            •   the identity of the persons or things injured, damaged, or
lost; and
            •   the title of the claim or suit, if applicable.
The E-Hail Application Provider must simultaneously send a copy of the notice
to:
      The City of New York c/o Insurance Claims Specialist, Affirmative
Litigation Division, New York City Law Department, 100 Church Street, New York,
New York 10007.
If the E-Hail Application Provider fails to comply with the requirements of
this subparagraph, the E-Hail Application Provider must indemnify the City for
all losses, judgments, settlements and expenses, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, arising from an insurer's disclaimer of coverage citing late
notice by or on behalf of the City.
         (ii)   Insurance coverage in the minimum amounts required in this
subdivision shall not relieve the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee of any
liability for indemnification under this Chapter.
         (iii)   The E-Hail Application Provider waives all rights against the
City, including its officers and employees, for any damages or losses that are
covered under any insurance required under this subdivision (whether or not
such insurance is actually procured or claims are paid under such insurance) or
any other insurance applicable to the activities of the E-Hail Application
Provider and/or its subcontractors required to be licensed under this Chapter.
         (iv)   If the E-Hail Application Provider requires any subcontractor
to procure insurance in connection with any of the activities licensed under
this Chapter and requires the subcontractor to name the E-Hail Application
Provider as an additional insured under such insurance, the E-Hail Application
Provider must ensure that such entity also names the City, including its
officials and employees, as an additional insured with coverage at least as
broad as the most recently issued ISO form CG 20 26.
   (f)   Renewals of Required Insurance Policies. The E-Hail Application
Provider must submit to the Commission Certificates of Insurance confirming
renewals of insurance before coverage of insurance policies required under
subdivision (d) of this section expires. Certificates of Insurance must comply
with the requirements of subparagraph (d)(5)(i) above.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-05(e)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Waivers or Modifications. Except where expressly prohibited by law,
the Chairperson may, in his or her discretion, waive or modify any requirements
for licensing under this Chapter in the interests of public safety and
convenience. Requests for waivers or modifications must be submitted in writing
to the Chairperson.
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 78-06 Licensing – Bond Required.
   (a)   Amount of Bond. An Applicant for an E-Hail Application Provider
License or renewal must deposit or have deposited with the Commission a fifty
thousand dollar ($50,000) bond per E-Hail Application, payable to the City of
New York. The bond must be provided by one or more sureties approved by the
Commission.
   (b)   Bond Guarantees. The bond must guarantee that the Applicant or
licensed E-Hail Application Provider will:
      •   comply with all applicable provisions of law and rules of the
Commission,
      •   pay all fines imposed by the Commission, and
      •   pay all judgments or settlements arising from any action connected in
any way with the E-Hail Application Provider License.
   (c)   Fines and Judgments. The E-Hail Application Provider is immediately
liable for the payment of any fine or judgment when the amount is determined or
upon final determination of an appeal. If the fine is not paid as required by
35 RCNY §
78-02(c), the Commission may draw upon the bond.
§ 78-07 Licensing – Fees and Term of License.
   (a)   Fee. Every application for a new or renewal E-Hail Application
Provider License must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of
$500 for each License to be issued or renewed for the term as provided in
subdivision (g) of this section.
   (b)   Modification of E-Hail Application Fee. Every application for approval
of a Modification of E-Hail Application must be accompanied by a non-refundable
application fee of $500 for each E-Hail Application for which a Modification of
E-Hail Application is sought.
   (c)   Form of Payment. All application fees must be paid in the form
authorized by 35 RCNY §
52-40.
   (d)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application.
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The fee to replace any lost, damaged or
destroyed License is $25.
   (f)   Term of License. The term of an E-Hail Application Provider License
will be three years or less and each License will expire on October 31st.
   (g)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least
sixty (60) days before the expiration date of the License.
      (2)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed by mail: The date of submission is the
postmark date.
         (iii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (3)   The Commission will not accept a renewal application after the
expiration date of the License. If the application is not filed before the
expiration date, the License cannot be renewed.
   (h)   Extensions.
      (1)   If a timely application for renewal of a License has been made as
required in subdivision (g) of this section, the Chairperson may extend the
term of the License until review of the renewal application is completed.
      (2)   The License will be deemed valid during this extended term even if
the application is ultimately denied.
      (3)   If a License renewal application is approved, the renewal License
expiration date will be based on the original expiration date of the License.
   (i)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended and it is also due to be renewed during
the suspension, the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must apply for renewal
as required in subdivision (g) of this section to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This applies even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019)
§ 78-08 Licensing – Cause for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Continuously Comply. Whenever the Commission determines
that the E-Hail Application Provider no longer meets the requirements for the
E-Hail Application Provider License, the Commission may suspend or revoke the
License and deny any application for renewal.
   (b)   Summary Suspension. Nothing in this section limits the authority of
the Commission to summarily suspend any E-Hail Application Provider License
when a threat to public health, safety, or welfare exists.
   (c)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within
ninety (90) days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson may deny an application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application by the
expiration date of the prior License.
   (d)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within a reasonable period as
requested or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in a denial
of the application.
§ 78-09 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   E-Hail Application Provider License Required. An individual or
Business Entity must not sell, lease, or make available for use in New York
City an E-Hail Application or enroll any individual or Business Entity into an
E-Hail Application without a Valid E-Hail Application Provider License.
   (b)   An E-Hail Application Provider must not permit the use of a non-
Technology System electronic credit card payment system unless that system
uses:
         (i)   E-Payment that is contained within a licensed E-Hail Application
and that meets all the requirements of this Chapter, or
         (ii)   E-Payment that is linked to a licensed E-Hail Application,
whether or not provided by the E-Hail Application Provider, that meets all
requirements of this Chapter.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
78-09
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 78-10 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law.
   (a)   Licenses and Permits. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must
obtain licenses and permits required by applicable local, state or federal law.
   (b)   Occupational Safety & Health Administration. An E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee must comply with all applicable Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) standards and requirements at the E-Hail
Application Provider Licensee's place of business, as well as all other
federal, state, and local laws governing its business.
   (c)   Payment of All Fines and Fees. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must pay all fines, fees, and taxes it owes to any federal, state, or local
governmental jurisdiction when they are due.
   (d)   Workers' Compensation Laws. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must comply with all laws regarding workers' compensation and disability
benefits, as well as all federal laws regarding the withholding of taxes and
payment of FICA and other withholding taxes.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine and/or suspension Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-10       until compliance
 
§ 78-11 General Requirements – Indemnification.
   (a)   General Indemnification. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must
defend, indemnify and hold the City, its officers and employees harmless from
any and all third-party claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are
without merit) or judgments for damages on account of any injuries or death to
any person or damage to any property and from costs and expenses (including
reasonable attorneys' fees) to which the City, its officers and employees may
be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly arising out of any
operations of the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee and/or its employees,
agents or subcontractors in connection with any of the activities licensed
under this Chapter to the extent resulting from any negligent act of commission
or omission, any intentional tortious act, or failure to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter. Insofar as the facts or law relating to any third-
party claim would preclude the City from being completely indemnified by the E-
Hail Application Provider Licensee, the City shall be partially indemnified by
the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee to the fullest extent permitted by
law.
   (b)   Infringement Indemnification. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must defend, indemnify and hold the City harmless from any and all third-party
claims (even if the allegations of the lawsuit are without merit) or judgments
for damages and from costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees)
to which the City may be subjected or which it may suffer or incur allegedly
arising out of or in connection with any infringement by the E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee, its agents or subcontractors of any copyright, trade
secrets, trademark or patent rights or any other property or personal right of
any third party in the conduct of the licensed activities. Insofar as the facts
or law relating to any third-party claim would preclude the City from being
completely indemnified by the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee, the City
shall be partially indemnified by the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee to
the fullest extent permitted by law.
   (c)   Not Limited by Insurance. The indemnification obligations set forth in
this section shall not be limited in any way by the E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee's obligations to obtain and maintain insurance as provided in 35 RCNY
§
78-05(d).
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $1,000 fine and/or suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
78-11(a)-(b) compliance
 
§ 78-12 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited.
   (a)   An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must not file with the
Commission any statement that he or she knows or reasonably should know to be
false, misleading, deceptive, or materially incomplete.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
78-12(a)
 
§ 78-13 General Requirements – Notice to TLC.
   (a)   Material Change in Information. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee must notify the Commission of any material change in the information
contained in its current E-Hail Application Provider License application or
renewal.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
78-13(a)    days
 
   (b)   Suspension or Revocation of License. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee must immediately notify the Commission in writing of any suspension or
revocation of any license granted to the E-Hail Application Provider Licensee,
or any other person acting on his or her behalf, by any agency of the City or
State of New York, or the government of the United States.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
78-13(b)    compliance
 
   (c)   Security Breach. The E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must inform
the Commission if it is required to make disclosures under State or Federal law
regarding security breaches, including the New York State Information Security
Breach and Notification Act (General Business Law § 899-aa).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
78-13(c)    compliance
 
§ 78-14 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address.
   (a)   Each E-Hail Application Provider must designate and provide the
Commission the street address of its primary E-Hail Application Provider
location as its Mailing Address.
   (b)   An E-Hail Application Provider must have and provide the Commission a
working Email Address and telephone number at all times.
   (c)   An E-Hail Application Provider must report any change of Mailing
Address, Email Address and telephone number to the Commission in person or by
mail within ten days.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-14(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
last Mailing Address or E-Mail Address provided by the E-Hail Application
Provider.
   (e)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
E-Hail Application Provider.
§ 78-15 Business Requirements – Fees Charged by E-Hail Application Provider
Licensees.
   (a)   Tips and Gratuities.
      (1)   An E-Hail Application Provider cannot charge a Passenger a tip or
gratuity unless
         (i)   The Driver receives the full amount of such tip or gratuity,
without any withholding or sharing, and
         (ii)   The Passenger can elect to change or withhold payment of such
tip or gratuity at any time prior to completion of the trip and payment of the
fare.
      (2)   An E-Hail Application Provider must not charge as a tip or gratuity
(or using the words "tip" or "gratuity" or something similar) any fee that the
Provider will retain.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $200 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-15(a)
 
   (b)   Fares. An E-Hail Application and an E-Hail Application Provider must
NOT charge any Passenger a fare for a trip that exceeds the fare as calculated
by the Taximeter, permitted in 35 RCNY §
58-26 and 35 RCNY §
82-26, unless it is a Flex Fare Trip. The E-Hail Application and the E-Hail
Application Provider may however charge additional fees to a Passenger above
the fare for the trip in accordance with subdivision (c) below so long as such
fees are clearly delineated and not called a fare or tip or gratuity. Any fare
charged for a Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle must not exceed the fees charged
for a non-Accessible Vehicle.
      (1)   Flex Fare Rate Schedule. An E-Hail App Provider that offers Flex
Fare Trips must submit a Flex Fare Rate Schedule, to be approved by the
Commission, outlining the manner in which the E-Hail App will calculate fares,
including the rate of fare it will use, all applicable taxes, fees and
surcharges, and any other fees (such as cancellation fee) charged to the
passengers. The E-Hail App Provider must comply with the Notice of Fee
requirements in accordance with subdivision (c) of this section.
         (i)   An E-Hail App Provider’s Flex Fare Rate Schedule must assess all
applicable taxes, fees, and surcharges that may be required by these Rules.
         (ii)   An E-Hail App Provider’s Flex Fare Rate Schedule must not
charge more for a wheelchair accessible Flex Fare request than for a non-
wheelchair accessible Flex Fare request.
         (iii)   An E-Hail App Provider must remit to each Medallion Owner (or
Owner’s Agent) all MTA Taxes assessed for trips performed in their respective
Taxicabs/SHLs.
         (iv)   An E-Hail App Provider must provide a means to allow passengers
to tip Drivers through the E-Hail App offering Flex Fare trips. An E-Hail App
Provider must remit to the Driver the entirety of anything designated as a tip
or gratuity collected by the E-Hail App Provider from a customer on behalf of
the Driver.
      (2)   All rate schedules and any subsequent modifications thereto shall
be approved by the Commission prior to such modifications taking effect.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-15(b)
 
   (c)   Notice of Fees. The E-Hail App Provider must provide Passengers and
Drivers with reasonable notice of all Passenger and Driver fees and rates
charged by the E-Hail App Provider for use of the E-Hail App, as applicable,
including but not limited to any variable or surge pricing policies applicable
to the fees charged by the E-Hail App Provider, cancellation fees, and no-show
fees, prior to Drivers' or Passengers' use of the E-Hail App for request of a
trip.
      (1)   The amounts of any fees must be viewable within the E-Hail
Application;
      (2)   The E-Hail App Provider is permitted to charge cancellation fees to
Passengers and/or Drivers who cancel E-Hailed trips using the E-Hail App if the
cancellation fees comply with the notification requirements outlined in this
subdivision and appear on the fee schedule described in subdivision (d) of this
section.
      (3)   The E-Hail App Provider must provide Drivers and Passengers with
reasonable notice of any modifications of such fees or rates, as applicable,
prior to the effective date of the modifications.
   (d)   File Fee Schedule. The E-Hail App Provider must file with the
Commission a complete schedule of fees and rates charged to Passengers and/or
Drivers for use of the E-Hail App, including but not limited to, any variable
or surge pricing policies applicable to the fees charged by the E-Hail App
Provider, cancellation fees, and no-show fees, and the fee structure (such as
whether it is based on per-trip usage, a subscription fee, or some other
manner). The fee schedule must clearly delineate to which party (the Passenger
or Driver) each fee is assessed. The E-Hail App Provider must also file with
the Commission all schedule updates.
   (e)   File User Agreement Terms. The E-Hail App Provider must file with the
Commission all forms of the user agreements, use contracts, and privacy terms
it requires for use, sale, and lease of the E-Hail App, both as to Passengers
and Drivers. The E-Hail App Provider must file with the Commission all updates
of such documents and/or terms reflecting changes thereto.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City
Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 78-16 Business Requirements – Use of E-Hail Application.
All of the following conditions apply with regard to an E-Hail Application
Provider's making an E-Hail Application available for use:
   (a)   The E-Hail Application Provider must not make an E-Hail Application
available for use unless the E-Hail Application has been approved by the
Commission pursuant to this Chapter and the E-Hail Application to be used is
identical to the E-Hail Application that was approved;
   (b)   No modification will be made to any Vehicle to install or mount a
device on which the E-Hail Application is to be used without the permission of
the Chairperson and the approval of the device and its installation and/or
mounting in the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 - $1,500 fine and/or suspension
78-16       up to 60 days or revocation for each          Appearance REQUIRED
            subdivision violated
 
§ 78-17 Business Requirements – Compliance with E-Hail Application Requirements
and Service Levels.
   (a)   Credit, Debit, and Prepaid Card Payment.
      (1)   An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that an E-Hail
Application that includes E-Payment provides Credit, Debit, and Prepaid Card
Services in compliance with the requirements of 35 RCNY §
78-21(b) and/or (c).
      (2)   An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure, for an E-Hail
Application that includes E-Payment, that when Passengers pay by credit, debit,
or prepaid card, the Driver receives deposit of funds within forty-eight (48)
business hours, excluding banking holidays, of transmission of a batch close
transaction from the E-Hail Application, except for incidents when there is a
fraud investigation, which must be completed within sixty (60) days of the
transaction.
      (3)   An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that an E-Hail
Application that includes E-Payment complies with the requirements of 35 RCNY §
78-21(b) and/or (c).
      (4)   An E-Hail Application may permit Passengers to split a fare if this
feature is provided by the party processing the fare payment.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60  Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(a)    days or revocation for each paragraph violated
 
   (b)   Trip Data Collection and Transmission. An E-Hail Application Provider
must ensure that an E-Hail Application collects and stores relevant trip
information to obtain a complete trip record, and transmits such data to the
Technology System or the Commission in compliance with the requirements in 35
RCNY §
78-21(e).
 
35 RCNY § 78-17(b)Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up Appearance REQUIRED
                   to 60 days or revocation
 
   (c)   Use Restrictions. An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that an
E-Hail Application restricts usage of the Application in compliance with the
use restrictions in 35 RCNY §
78-21(a).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(c)    days or revocation
 
   (d)   Security. An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that with respect
to an E-Hail Application, the E-Hail Application Provider is in compliance with
the security requirements in 35 RCNY §
78-21(f).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(d)    days or revocation
 
   (e)   Data Retention. An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that, with
respect to an E-Hail Application, all data required to be maintained pursuant
to 35 RCNY §
78-21 is maintained for the period required in 35 RCNY §
78-21(g).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(e)    days or revocation
 
   (f)   Inspection by TLC. An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that an
E-Hail Application can be inspected and accessed by Commission personnel at any
time. This requirement includes providing access to the E-Hail Application with
requisite Driver and Passenger test IDs and access to the Driver and Passenger
versions of the E-Hail App to facilitate testing.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(f)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Commission Ordered Testing. In any proceeding where the E-Hail
Application Provider has been found guilty of a violation of any of the
provisions of this section, the Commission may order the E-Hail Application
Provider to provide, within sixty (60) days of the final decision on the
violation:
      •   documentation demonstrating that subsequent to the violation an
independent third party certified by ISO 9001 or other certification body
acceptable to the Commission, has performed testing of the E-Hail Application
and related services to determine that the condition giving rise to the
violation has been corrected, and
      •   certification by such third party of the successful results of such
testing.
   (h)*   Accept E-Hails by Telephone. E-Hail Application Providers must
maintain a call center for customers to request a trip or to ask about the
status of a trip over the phone, which must be available to take calls 24 hours
a day and seven days a week, without regard to local, national, or
international holidays, or other events. The phone line operated by the E-Hail
Application Provider must connect to TLC’s designated phone routing system so
that the call center of an E-Hail Application Provider can accept calls that
are forwarded from the TLC to such Provider.
* Editor's note: Pursuant to the rule published in the City Record on April 2,
2025, subsection (h) is effective on July 1, 2025.
      i.   The E-Hail Application Provider can use an automated service to
receive phone calls but the caller must be able to speak to a call center
agent, and not an automated service, when the caller requests the ability to
speak to a human.
      ii.   Callers must be able to speak with someone in real-time if their
ride does not show up or if the Driver does show up but refuses to transport
the passenger. Real-time updates available from the call center must include,
at a minimum, the following updates:
         A.   Booking and re-booking functionalities.
         B.   Status updates on previously requested trips.
      iii.   Call center agents employed by E-Hail Application Providers for
the purposes of routing requests for accessible service must receive disability
etiquette and sensitivity training.
         A.   Call center agents must be able to provide excellent customer
service to people with various disabilities, including speech disabilities and
cognitive disabilities by demonstrating respect and empathy to customer.
      iv.   Call center agents must have knowledge of New York City streets and
transportation systems.
      v.   The E-Hail Application Provider must provide re-training to any call
center agent that is the subject of a complaint from the riding public based on
the requirements of sections of 35 RCNY §
78-17(h)(iii) - (iv).
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 per violation and suspension Appearance REQUIRED
78-17(h)    until compliance
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City
Record 4/2/2025, eff. 7/1/2025)
§ 78-18 Business Requirements – Cooperation with the Commission.
   (a)   Upon request of the Commission, an E-Hail Application Provider must
provide at no charge a fully operable device on which the Commission can access
the E-Hail Application, and access to the E-Hail Application with requisite
Driver and Passenger test IDs.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 fine and suspension until  Appearance REQUIRED
78-18(a)    compliance for each subdivision violated
 
§ 78-19 Business Requirements – E-Hail Application Provider Liability for
Conduct of Employees.
   (a)   Liability for Employee Conduct. An E-Hail Application Provider must
supervise and be responsible for the conduct of all of its employees,
contractors, and agents for activities performed to carry out the requirements
of this Chapter. For clarity, this subdivision and subdivision (b) of this
section shall not be applicable to Drivers, or to individuals or business
entities performing work for any E-Hail Application Provider or its
subcontractor(s) who under applicable law are deemed to be independent
contractors and not employees.
   (b)   Familiarizing Employees with Rules and Regulations. An E-Hail
Application Provider must ensure that all of its employees, contractors, and
agents are fully familiar with all relevant regulatory agency rules and
regulations.
   (c)   Compliance with Laws. An E-Hail Application Provider must ensure that
all of its employees, contractors, and agents perform their duties in
compliance with all relevant federal, state, and city laws, rules, and
regulations.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $500 fine and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
78-19(a)-(c) days or revocation
 
§ 78-20 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules.
   (a)   Acceptance of Gift or Gratuity. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee or any person acting on his or her behalf must not accept any gift,
gratuity, or thing of value from an Owner or Driver of any vehicle licensed by
the Commission or from anyone acting on behalf of an Owner or Driver for the
purpose of violating any of these rules through acts of commission or omission.
   (b)   Reporting Requests for Gift or Gratuity. An E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee, any person acting on the E-Hail Application Provider's
behalf, or any of the E-Hail Application Provider's employees must immediately
report to the Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation any request or
demand for a gift, gratuity, or thing of value by any employee, representative,
or member of the Commission or by any public servant.
   (c)   Offer of Gifts and Gratuities. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
or any person acting on his or her behalf must not offer or give any gift,
gratuity, or thing of value to any employee, representative, or member of the
Commission or to any other public servant.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Reporting Offers of Gift or Gratuity. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee must notify the Commission immediately by telephone and in writing or
email within 24 hours after receiving any offer of a gift or gratuity
prohibited by subdivision (a) above.
   (e)   Fraud, Misrepresentation and Larceny. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee, while performing his or her duties and responsibilities as an E-Hail
Application Provider Licensee, must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or
in concert with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation, or larceny.
Examples of fraud, larceny, or misrepresentation include, but are not limited
to:
      •   calibration of a fare other than that set by the Commission;
      •   falsification of Trip Data.
 
35 RCNY §   Penalty: $10,000 fine and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(d)-(e)
 
   (f)   Willful Acts of Omission and Commission.
      (1)   Omission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of an E-
Hail Application Provider Licensee, an E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must not deliberately fail to perform, alone or with another, any act where
this failure is against the best interests of the public, although not
specifically mentioned in these Rules.
      (2)   Commission. While performing the duties and responsibilities of an
E-Hail Application Provider Licensee, an E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must not deliberately perform, alone or with another, any act that is against
the best interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these
Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(f)    or revocation
 
   (g)   Notice of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must notify the Commission
in writing within two (2) days after any criminal conviction of the E-Hail
Application Provider Licensee or any of the E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee's Business Entity Persons.
      (2)   Notification must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition of the conviction issued by
the clerk of the court.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(g)
 
   (h)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee
must not threaten, harass, or abuse any governmental or Commission
representative, public servant, or other person while performing his or her
duties and responsibilities as an E-Hail Application Provider Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(h)    or revocation
 
   (i)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. An E-Hail Application Provider
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a Commission
representative, public servant, or other person while performing his or her
duties and responsibilities as an E-Hail Application Provider Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $500 and/or suspension up to 60 days Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(i)    or revocation
 
   (j)   Failure to Cooperate with Law Enforcement. An E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee must cooperate with all law enforcement officers and
representatives of the Commission at all times.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-20(j)
 
   (k)   Failure to Cooperate with the Commission. An E-Hail Application
Provider Licensee must answer and comply as directed with all questions,
communications, notices, directives, and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives. An E-Hail Application Provider Licensee must produce his or
her Commission License and other required documents whenever the Commission
requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $250 fine and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
78-20(k)    compliance
 
§ 78-21 Technical Requirements – E-Hail Application.
No E-Hail Application will be approved by the Commission pursuant to this
Chapter unless it complies with the all of the requirements set forth in this
section or as such requirements may be waived or modified by the Commission
pursuant to 35 RCNY §
78-05(f).
   (a)   Dispatching. The E-Hail Application must allow passengers to request
transportation in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery and have the ability to
dispatch a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery to the requested location.
      (1)   The E-Hail Application must not transmit E-Hails to any Driver who
is not validly licensed to drive a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery or who is
operating a Vehicle that does not have a Valid Taxicab License or Street Hail
Livery Permit, per the TLC's Current Licensees list published by the TLC.  
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $400 fine and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
78-21(a)(1) days
 
      (2)   The E-Hail Application must be available to a Driver ONLY when the
Vehicle is standing or stopped, except that an E-Hail Application can permit a
Driver to accept an E-Hail request, cancel an E-Hail request, or indicate
arrival at the pickup location with a single touch using pre-programmed buttons
or using voice activation while the vehicle is in motion. All other use of the
E-Hail Application must be velocity gated by the E-Hail Application Provider to
prevent its use while the vehicle is in motion.
      (3)   The E-Hail Application may only disclose to a Driver a potential
Passenger's pickup location, drop-off location, and fare estimate, or binding
upfront fare quote if it is a Flex Fare Trip, except that a Passenger's trip
identification number or E-Hail Application user name may be transmitted to the
Driver after the Driver has accepted the Passenger's E-Hail request.
      (4)   The E-Hail Application must require a Driver to affirmatively opt
in to use the E-Hail Application and must allow the Driver to opt out of
receiving E-Hail requests from Passengers while on duty.
      (5)   The E-Hail Application must make a wheelchair accessible option
available to allow Passengers to indicate that they would like a wheelchair
accessible vehicle. The E-Hail Application must not dispatch a non-accessible
vehicle to a Passenger that requested an accessible vehicle.
      (6)   The E-Hail Application must require the customer to affirmatively
acknowledge and accept that the customer is being charged a non-metered fare
when accepting a Flex Fare Trip.
      (7)   The E-Hail Application must
         (i)   Automatically send Accessible E-Hail Requests to Drivers any
time the E-Hail Application is on or engaged (except where the Driver opts out
of the E-Hail function).
         (ii)   Display the Passenger’s request for service to the Driver in a
way that does not indicate to the Driver that the Passenger will require
additional assistance to enter or exit the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §        Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
78-21(a)(1) - (7)
 
   (b)   Dispatch and Pay (Optional). E-Hail Applications that allow Passengers
to pay for an E-Hailed trip using their credit/debit card on file with the E-
Hail Application are subject to the following:
      (1)   The E-Hail Application must not require a Passenger to pay a tip to
the Driver.
      (2)   The E-Hail Application must transmit an accurate receipt in
electronic form, including by being viewable in the Application, to the
Passenger and to the Driver. The receipt must contain all the following
information:
         (i)   All items required by 35 RCNY §
66-24(c)(9); and
         (ii)   Any fee paid by the Passenger to the E-Hail Application
Provider if paid directly to such Provider, clearly identified. NOTE: 35 RCNY §
78-15(a) governs the payment of tips or gratuities.
      (3)   The E-Hail Application must receive the fare and Trip Data
automatically from the Technology System or Taximeter, unless it is a Flex Fare
Trip, and must not permit a Driver or any other person to enter any fare
information manually. The E-Hail Application also must provide the Technology
System Provider with the following:
         (i)   The credit card information necessary to process the transaction
through the Technology System Provider's payment gateway and the amount to be
charged for the transaction, including any tip and E-Hail service fee, if
included in the amount to be charged;
         (ii)   Credit, debit, or prepaid card and payment information
necessary to allow Technology System Providers to display total charges,
including time-and-distance fares, tips, extras, surcharges, taxes, and any
fees charged by the E-Hail Application Provider for use of the E-Hail
Application on printed receipts, and allow submission to the Chairperson of a
complete electronic trip record for the fare as further described in
subdivision (e) of this section; and
         (iii)   The request identification number necessary to allow
Technology System Providers to submit to the Chairperson the same unique
identification submitted by the E-Hail Application Provider as further
described in subdivision (d) of this section.
      (4)   The E-Hail Application must comply with all applicable PCI
Standards. Credit, debit, and prepaid card information for electronic payments
made through an E-Hail Application must not be stored locally on the electronic
device on which the E-Hail Application being used resides, or locally on the
Technology System (if applicable) after the credit, debit, or pre-paid card has
been authorized or declined.
      (5)   The E-Hail Application must be capable of generating the following
data:
         (i)   reasonably detailed data of individual and cumulative payment
transactions (including sufficient detail to support daily and monthly
reconciliations and to perform problem resolution);
         (ii)   if the payment is by credit, debit, or prepaid card, in
addition to the information in subparagraph (i) above, the name of the credit,
debit, or prepaid card, and the name of the credit card merchant engaged by the
E-Hail Application Provider; and
         (iii)   data summarizing the number of fares, the total fare amount,
and as applicable, the number of credit, debit, and prepaid card transactions
and the total fares of such transactions;
      (6)   The data described in paragraph (5) of this subdivision and its
component elements must be stored, maintained and accessible to the Commission
and any designee as follows:
         (i)   In a standardized format and layout prescribed by the Commission
that is open and non-proprietary; and
         (ii)   By secure file transfer protocol, transfer according to a
format, layout, procedure, and frequency prescribed by the Commission.
   (c)   Hail and Pay (Optional). E-Hail Applications that allow Passengers to
pay for a Street-Hailed trip using their credit/debit card on file with the E-
Hail Application are subject to the following:
      (1)   The E-Hail Application must comply with requirements as set forth
in subdivision (b)(1) through (6) of this section.
      (2)   The E-Hail Application must integrate with all licensed Technology
Systems to allow Passengers to Pair to any and all Taxicabs and Street Hail
Liveries.
         (i)   Within 5 days of licensure the E-Hail Application Provider must
notify all licensed Technology System Providers that it intends to provide Hail
and Pay.
         (ii)   Pursuant to 35 RCNY §
66-24(e)(1), the Technology System Provider will respond within 5 days and
either direct the E-Hail Application Provider to begin necessary development
work, or request the documentation listed below to do the work itself.
            (A)   Integration by the Technology System Provider. 
               •   If requested by the Technology System Provider, the E-Hail
Application Provider must submit, within 5 days, all information on the design
and inner operation of the E-Hail Application that is necessary for the
Technology System Provider to establish an interface and communication of data
between the Technology System and the E-Hail Application. The submitted
information must include, but is not limited to a live application programming
interface (API) providing all functions described in 35 RCNY §
66-24(d)(2), a test environment for said API, and a simulator.
            (B)   Integration by E-Hail Application Provider. 
               •   When supplied by the Technology System Provider with all
information stated in item (A) of this subparagraph on the design and inner
operation of the Technology System that is necessary for the E-hail Application
Provider to establish an interface and communication of data between the TSP
and the E-hail Application, then the E-Hail Application Provider must complete
integration within 90 days.
      (3)   Separate Violations. Each failure on the part of an E-Hail
Application Provider to cooperate with a licensed Technology System Provider
for the purpose of maintaining an API as provided in paragraph (1) of this
subdivision will constitute a separate violation of this rule.
   (d)   Public API. The E-Hail Application Provider must maintain an
application programming interface (API) that includes but is not limited to the
following functionalities:
      (1)   Dispatching. 
         (i)   For any Driver that has accepted an E-Hail or dispatch from an
E-Hail Application Provider or the Accessible Taxi Dispatcher, provide:
            (A)   a cancel event if the Passenger cancels or retracts his or
her E-Hail or dispatch; and
            (B)   a unique E-Hail request identification number;
      (2)   E-Payment. 
         (i)   Receive from the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher access to itemized fare data including time-and-distance fare,
tolls, surcharges, extras, and taxes from the Technology System and Taximeter,
in real time, when the trip has been completed and the Driver has disengaged
the Taximeter, or access to itemized fare data for Flex Fare Trips;
         (ii)   Provide to the E-Hail Application Provider or Accessible Taxi
Dispatcher a confirmation that electronic credit card payment for the total
fare amount has been successfully processed; and
         (iii)   Provide relevant payment information to the E-Hail Application
Provider or Accessible Taxi Dispatcher to the extent necessary to display the
total charges, including E-Hail service fee and tip (if applicable) on the
receipt and collect and transmit Trip Data.
   (e)   Trip Data Collection and Transmission. An E-Hail Application and its
third party designee, if any, must be capable of automatically collecting and
transmitting E-Hail request data and Trip Data as described below.
      (1)   The E-Hail Application and its third part designee, if any, must be
capable of automatically collecting and transmitting to the Commission data on
all E-Hail requests and the outcome of those requests (including pickup and
drop-off locations specified by latitude and longitude), in a format, schedule
and layout prescribed by the Commission, including (if the trip was fulfilled):
         (i)   the date and time the Passenger requested the trip, and
         (ii)   the date and time the vehicle arrived at the pickup location,
and
         (iii)   An E-Hail Provider must submit accurate and complete trip data
for a month’s trips no later than the last day of the following month. For
example, all September trip records will be due on October 31st. The following
penalties accrue with respect to each untimely, inaccurate or incomplete
submission of trip records.
      (2)   The E-Hail Application must be able to provide reporting to the TLC
as to whether a passenger request was for a wheelchair accessible vehicle.
      (3)   The E-Hail Application and its third party designee, if any, must
be capable of automatically collecting and transmitting to the Technology
System the Trip Data required below for all trips using E-Payment, except for
Flex Fare Trips.
         (i)   E-Hail Application License number;
         (ii)   Credit, debit, or pre-paid card type;
         (iii)   first two and last four digits of the credit, debit, or
prepaid card used for paying fares;
         (iv)   E-Hail service fee collected by the E-Hail Application
Provider, if applicable;
         (v)   itemized fare;
         (vi)   tip amount;
         (vii)   E-Hail account holder identifier (uniquely identifying the
Driver in the E-Hail Application's system);
         (viii)   the number of Passengers that payment of the fare was split
among if the E-Hail Application permits the fare to be split; and
         (ix)   a unique identification number assigned to each E-Hail request
made by a Passenger in the E-Hail Application.
 
            Fine: $100 for each day past the date the
            complete, accurate records are due if plead
            guilty before a hearing and suspension
35 RCNY §  until compliance; $150 for each day past    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
78-21(e)    the records are due if found guilty
            following a hearing and suspension until
            compliance. Fine amount not to exceed
            $10,000.
 
   (f)   Security.
      (1)   If the E-Hail Application provides for E-Payment, all features of
the E-Hail Application related to E-Payment required by this section, including
the collection, transmission and maintenance of data by the E-Hail Application
Provider, must conform to applicable PCI Standards.
   (g)   Data Retention. All data required to be collected, transmitted and
maintained pursuant to this section must be maintained for at least three (3)
years.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018,
eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City
Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 78-22 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Taxicab Improvement Fund. 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the collected Taxicab Improvement Surcharge remitted by the Taxicab
Driver Taxicab Improvement Fund within 60 days of the end of the payment
period. For example, the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge due for the month of
July must be remitted to the TLC in its entirety by October 1st.
      (2)   The Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application provider
must pay the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge
Fund to the Taxicab Improvement Fund at the time and in the manner required by
the Commission.
      (3)   If a Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
does not pay the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Improvement Fund
at the time required, non-payment will be grounds for suspension of the
Technology System Provider License or E-Hail Application Provider License, and/
or denial of any renewal application or of any application for another TLC-
issued license, as well as monetary penalties.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
78-22(a)
 
   (b)   Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund.
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
must pay the collected Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge remitted by the
Street Hail Livery Driver to the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund within 60
days of the end of the payment period. For example, the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Surcharge due for the month of July must be remitted to the TLC in
its entirety by October 1st.
      (2)   The Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application provider
must pay the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Fund at the time and in the manner required by the Commission.
      (3)   If a Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider
does not pay the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail
Livery Improvement Fund at the time required, non-payment may be grounds for
suspension of the Technology System Provider License or E-Hail Application
Provider License, and/or denial of any renewal application or of any
application for another TLC-issued license, as well as monetary penalties.
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
78-22(b)
 
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; added City Record 2/2/2023, eff.
3/4/2023; amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024)
Chapter 80: Drivers of Taxicabs, For-Hire Vehicles and Street Hail Liveries
§ 80-01 Scope of this Chapter.
   (a)   To establish procedures for the licensing and regulation of Drivers
Licensed by the Taxi and Limousine Commission to drive Taxicabs, For-Hire
Vehicles, and Street Hail Liveries.
   (b)   To establish operating rules to protect the public.
   (c)   To establish appropriate penalties for the violation of these Rules.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity. 
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing, soliciting or
advertising the provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation
service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License as a for hire
driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend a Hearing. 
   (c)   Payment of Fines. 
      (1)   Fines are due within 30 days of the day the Respondent is found
guilty of the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
OATH Hearings Division within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5, in which case the payment of the fines will be deferred until 30
days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Discretionary Penalties. In the alternative to any of the specific
penalties established in this Chapter, the Commission may in its discretion,
impose a penalty of License revocation, License suspension of up to six months,
and/or a fine, not to exceed $1,000 for each violation, against a Licensed
Driver. (See 35 RCNY
Chapter 68 Adjudications, 35 RCNY §
68-02) 
   (e)   Mandatory Penalties. If a Licensee has violated a Rule listed below,
or any combination of these Rules, the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH or,
if applicable, the Chairperson will impose the following mandatory penalties
and fines. 
 
                                                                                                                     Mandatory
VIOLATION Description                                                           Rule                                 Penalty/
                                                                                                                     Fine - ALL
                                                                                35 RCNY §
1. Overcharging Passengers                                                      80-17(a)(1) & (2) & (3), 35 RCNY §  First
                                                                                80-17(k)(1) & (2)                    violation:
2. Refusal of service – Unjustified refusal to transport Passengers within NYC35 RCNY §                           $350 if
or defined counties                                                             80-20(a)(1), (5) and (6)             plead
3. Refusal of service – Requiring assistant for Passengers with a disability, 35 RCNY §                           guilty
or seeking to charge additional fares for such an assistant                     80-20(a)(2)                          before a
4. Refusal of service – Refusing to transport wheelchairs, crutches or other  35 RCNY §                           hearing;
mobility aids for Passengers with a disability                                  80-20(a)(3)                          $500 if
                                                                                                                     found
                                                                                                                     guilty
                                                                                                                     following a
                                                                                                                     hearing.
                                                                                                                     Second
                                                                                                                     violation
                                                                                                                     (any
                                                                                                                     combination
                                                                                                                     of
                                                                                                                     violations)
                                                                                                                     w/in 24
                                                                                                                     months:
                                                                                                                     $700 if
                                                                                                                     plead
                                                                                                                     guilty
                                                                                                                     before a
                                                                                                                     hearing;
                                                                                                                     $1,000 and
                                                                                                                     possible
                                                                                                                     suspension
                                                                                                                     of License
                                                                                                                     for up to
                                                                                                                     30 days if
                                                                                                                     found
5. Refusal of service – Seeking destination before Passenger is seated inside 35 RCNY §                           guilty
vehicle                                                                         80-20(a)(4)                          following a
                                                                                                                     hearing.
                                                                                                                     Third
                                                                                                                     violation
                                                                                                                     (any
                                                                                                                     combination
                                                                                                                     of
                                                                                                                     violations)
                                                                                                                     w/in 36
                                                                                                                     months:
                                                                                                                     $750 and
                                                                                                                     Revocation
                                                                                                                     of License
                                                                                                                     if plead
                                                                                                                     guilty
                                                                                                                     before a
                                                                                                                     hearing;
                                                                                                                     $1,000 and
                                                                                                                     Revocation
                                                                                                                     of License
                                                                                                                     if found
                                                                                                                     guilty
                                                                                                                     following a
                                                                                                                     hearing.
      (1)   $10-or-More Overcharge. Notwithstanding the penalty cited above for
overcharging Passengers in violation of 35 RCNY §
80-17(a)(1) and (2), if a Driver charges or attempts to charge $10 or more
above the approved rate of fare or above the rate quoted by the For Hire Base
for a prearranged trip, the Taxi and Limousine Tribunal at OATH or the
Chairperson will revoke the Driver License and may require a Driver to return
any overpayment to the Passenger. 
      (2)   Calculating Time Periods. The OATH Tribunal or the Chairperson will
count the 24- and 36-month penalty periods going backwards, from the date of
the last violation. 
      (3)   No License Issued for Period of One Year Following Certain
Violations. A driver who has had his or her License revoked for any of the
above violations will not be able to receive any Commission License for a
period of one year from the date of revocation. 
   (f)   Paratransit Drivers Operating Accessible Street Hail Liveries. 
      (i)   When a Paratransit Driver is operating an Accessible Street Hail
Livery, as provided in 35 RCNY §
80-05, the requirements of this Chapter as to the operation of a Street Hail
Livery apply to such Paratransit Driver driving an Accessible Street Hail
Liveries and such Paratransit Driver can be issued a summons for a violation of
this Chapter relating to the operation of a Street Hail Livery.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 80-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Defined Terms are Capitalized. All terms defined in this Chapter or in
35 RCNY
Chapter 51 ("Definitions") appear in this text with the initial letter in each
word of the term capitalized (Example: TLC Driver License, not TLC driver
license.) 
   (b)   General Terms are Specific to "Taxicabs," "For-Hire Vehicles," or
"Street Hail Liveries" in this Chapter. 
      (1)   When used in this Chapter, capitalized terms such as
         (i)   Driver will mean the Driver of a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or
Street Hail Livery. The term Driver can also mean a Paratransit Driver
operating an Accessible Street Hail Livery pursuant to 35 RCNY §
80-05.
         (ii)   Vehicle will mean a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail
Livery.
         (iii)   License will mean the TLC Driver License.
   (c)   Definitions. 
      (1)   Applicant in this chapter refers to an Applicant for an original or
renewal TLC Driver License. 
      (2)   Application in this chapter refers to an application for a TLC
Driver License, including all documentation and other information submitted as
part of the application. 
      (3)   Driver, in this chapter, means a holder of a TLC Driver License. 
      (4)   License in this Chapter means a TLC License to drive a Taxicab,
Street Hail Livery and For-Hire Vehicle. 
      (5)   Qualified Vehicle License (or "QVL") is the license issued by an
Issuing Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's vehicles authorizing them to
provide pre-arranged, for-hire transportation within its jurisdiction. 
      (6)   Qualified Driver's License (or "QDL") is a license issued by an
Issuing Jurisdiction to that jurisdiction's drivers authorizing them to operate
an authorized vehicle to provide pre-arranged, for-hire transportation within
its jurisdiction. 
      (7)   Reciprocity (or Reciprocal Recognition) means that: 
         (1)   New York City For-Hire Vehicles and Drivers can do pickups or
drop offs in Issuing Jurisdictions for trips ending or beginning in NYC, and
         (2)   Vehicles and drivers that are licensed to perform for-hire
transportation by a Issuing Jurisdiction can do pickups or drop offs in NYC for
trips ending or beginning in the Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (8)   Use an Electronic Communication Device (or Using an Electronic
Communication Device), in this Chapter, means to 
         (1)   Operate any function of an Electronic Communication Device in
any way, or
         (2)   Have a device permitting hands-free operation of an Electronic
Communication Device in or near the ear.
         (3)   Exception for Street Hail Liveries and For-Hire Vehicles: In a
Street Hail Livery or For-Hire Vehicle, a short business-related communication
with a Base is NOT a Use of an Electronic Communication Device if all of the
following apply: 
            (i)   The communication is about a Dispatch; and
            (ii)   The communication occurs using either an FCC-licensed
commercial two-way radio or a device, including a smart phone, which is mounted
in a fixed position and not hand-held; and
            (iii)   The communication occurs using either voice or one-touch
pre-programmed buttons or keys.
         (4)   Exceptions pursuant to 35 RCNY §
80-22: Use of an electronic device permitted pursuant to 35 RCNY §
80-22 is not Use of an Electronic Communication Device. 
      (9)   Vehicle, in this Chapter, refers to a Taxicab, a For-Hire Vehicle
or a Street Hail Livery. 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 80-04 Licensing – Requirements.
   (a)   Age. An Applicant for a TLC Driver License must be at least 19 years
of age. 
   (b)   Identification. An Applicant for an original TLC Driver License must
produce both of the following proofs of identity: 
      (1)   A Valid Government-issued photo ID.
      (2)   A Valid Social Security number.
   (c)   Chauffeur's License. An Applicant must have a Valid Chauffeur's
License. 
   (d)   Summary of Driving Record. An Applicant whose driver's license has
been issued by a state other than New York or who has held a driver's license
issued by a state other than New York within the two years prior to the date of
the Application, must provide the Commission with an abstract of his or her
driving record from the state that issued the Applicant's driver's license,
dated no more than 90 days prior to the date of the Application, covering at
least the two years prior to the date of the Application. 
   (e)   Physical and Mental Fitness for the Job. 
      (1)   The Applicant must be of sound mental and physical condition and
fit to safely operate a vehicle and fulfill the duties of a licensee.
      (2)   The Applicant's fitness must be certified by a physician licensed
by the State of New York or by the Applicant's state of residence on forms
provided by the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission can, for good cause, require the Applicant to be
examined by a licensed physician chosen by the Commission.
      (4)   An existing License can be suspended or revoked if the Driver fails
to be examined for a physical or mental condition.
   (f)   Familiar with New York. Applicant must be familiar with the following:
 
      (1)   The geography, streets and traffic regulations of the City of New
York
      (2)   The rules and regulations of the New York City Taxi and Limousine
Commission
      (3)   The Vehicle and Traffic Law of the State of New York.
   (g)   Pass Drug Test. 
      (1)   All Applicants for new TLC Driver Licenses, except New York City
Police Officers, must be tested, at the Applicant's expense, for drugs or
controlled substances.
      (2)   The Commission designates who can perform the drug test and will
only designate an individual or entity that has a permit issued by the New York
State Department of Health.
      (3)   If an Applicant tests positive for drugs or controlled substances,
the Commission will deny the Applicant's license and such decision is final.
   (h)   Fingerprinting for the Purpose of Determining Good Moral Character. 
      (1)   The Applicant must be of good moral character.
      (2)   An Applicant for a TLC Driver License will be fingerprinted for the
purpose of securing criminal history records from the New York State Division
of Criminal Justice Services.
      (3)   The criminal history of any Applicant, including a renewal
Applicant, will be reviewed in a manner consistent with Article 23-A of the New
York State Correction Law.
      (4)   The application of any Applicant will be denied, and the TLC Driver
License of any current holder will be revoked, following a conviction for any
serious criminal offense (as set forth in § 498(1)(f) of the New York Vehicle
and Traffic Law).
      (5)   The Applicant will pay any processing fee required by the State.
   (i)   Agreement to Accept Legal Notices or Processes. 
      (1)   An Applicant must agree to accept service of any sort of notice or
legal process issued by any agency of the City of New York upon the Applicant
(Licensee) at the Applicant's Mailing Address.
      (2)   These official notices can be left with a member of the Applicant's
(Licensee's) family or any other person who also lives at the Applicant's
(Licensee's) Mailing Address.
   (j)   Training. The Commission requires that Applicants complete the
required courses and pass all prescribed tests, both oral and written, as
administered by the Commission or at its direction. All training and courses
must be completed at a TLC Authorized Driver Education Services Provider except
for the Defensive Driving Course. 
      (1)   Defensive Driving Course. 
         (i)   Applicants for a new TLC Driver License must hold a current
certificate of completion that was issued no more than three years prior to the
application date for the required hours of instruction in a New York State DMV
Approved Defensive Driving Course.
         (ii)   Applicants for a renewal TLC Driver License must hold a current
certificate of completion that was issued no more than three years prior to the
renewal application date for the required hours of instruction in a New York
State DMV Approved Defensive Driving Course.
      (2)   TLC Driver License Education Course. Applicants for a new TLC
Driver License must complete the TLC Driver License Education course and pass
an examination on course subjects as a condition of licensure. 
         (i)   Licensees who received a TLC Driver License on the condition
that they complete authorized TLC Driver License Education Course and pass
prescribed tests within 90 days as a condition of continued Licensure must
complete the TLC Driver License Education Course before renewing their
subsequently converted TLC Driver License.
      (3)   TLC License Renewal Course. Applicants for a renewal TLC Driver
License must complete the TLC License Renewal Course within 90 days prior to
the renewal application date. 
      (4)   Passenger Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle Training.
Applicants for a new TLC Driver License or for renewal of a TLC Driver License
must complete the Passenger Assistance and Wheelchair Accessible Vehicle
Training as a condition of licensure. 
      (5)   Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course. A driver
convicted of the Use of an Electronic Communication Device rule must complete
the Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course no later than 60 days
after the date of conviction. 
      (6)   Point Reduction Course. Driver may voluntarily attend and complete
the Point Reduction Course to reduce the Driver's Persistent Violator Program
points prior to the adjudication of the Persistent Violator summons. 
      (7)   Sex Trafficking Awareness Training. 
         (i)   All Applicants, including Applicants for renewal licenses, must
do all of the following:
            A.   Complete Sex Trafficking Awareness Training, and
            B.   Certify to the Commission as part of his or her application
that he or she has completed such training.
         (ii)   For any Applicant applying for a License or for renewal of a
License, completion of Sex Trafficking Awareness Training and certification of
completion are conditions for the issuance or renewal of such license.
         (iii)   Continuing Sex Trafficking Awareness Training. Applicants who
have previously completed the Sex Trafficking Awareness Training at least once
and have certified that they have done so as required by subparagraphs (i) and
(ii) of this paragraph, are not required to do so again, provided that they do
all of the following: 
            A.   The Applicant must obtain and review the Continuing Sex
Trafficking Awareness Training materials approved by the Commission, and
            B.   The Applicant must certify to the Commission as part of his or
her application that he or she has obtained and reviewed Continuing Sex
Trafficking Awareness Training material provided by the Commission.
               C.   For applicants who qualify to use this exception, review of
the written Continuing Sex Trafficking Awareness Training materials and
certification of obtaining and review of such materials are conditions for the
issuance or renewal of a license.
      (8)   Vision Zero and Accessibility Remedial Education Course. A driver
convicted of a third or subsequent 35 RCNY §
80-13(a)(1) or (a)(2) violation must complete the Vision Zero Remedial
Education Course no later than 60 days after the date of conviction. 
      (9)   Military Exemption. Any Applicant for a License who previously held
a Valid TLC Driver License, a Taxicab Driver License or a For-Hire Driver
License will not be required to take the TLC Driver License Education Course,
provided that the Applicant meets the following conditions: 
         (i)   The Applicant's previous Driver License expired solely because
the Applicant was not available to renew his or her License because he or she
was engaged in active military service.
         (ii)   The Applicant's military service began before the expiration
date of his or her prior License.
         (iii)   The Applicant filed an application within 90 days of
completing active military service, and in no event later than three years
following expiration of the prior License.
         (iv)   The Applicant provided proof of the dates of active military
service.
         (v)   The Applicant meets all other requirements for obtaining a new
License.
      (10)   Exemption for New York City Police Officers. Any Applicant for a
License who is a New York City Police Officer will not be required to take the
TLC Driver License Education Course, provided that the Applicant meets the
following conditions: 
         (i)   Applicant must present a letter from his or her commanding
officer approving the application.
         (ii)   Applicant must pass an examination authorized by the
Commission.
         (iii)   Applicant must meet all other requirements for obtaining a new
License.
      (11)   Life Experience Exemption. Any Applicant for a License will not be
required to take the TLC Driver License Education Course, provided: 
         (i)   The Applicant previously held a Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire
Driver License or TLC Driver License.
         (ii)   No prior Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire Driver License or TLC
Driver License was revoked or expired while license revocation charges were
pending or was surrendered while license revocation charges were pending.
         (iii)   For Applicants applying fewer than two years after the
expiration date of the prior Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire Driver License or
TLC Driver License, the Applicant held a Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire
Driver License or TLC Driver License for a total of at least 10 years.
         (iv)   For Applicants applying more than two years but less than five
years after the expiration date of the prior Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire
Driver License or TLC Driver License, the Applicant held a Taxicab Driver
License, For-Hire Driver License or TLC Driver License for a total of at least
15 years.
         (v)   The Applicant meets all other requirements for obtaining a new
TLC Driver License.
         (vi)   The Applicant had no outstanding fines when the Applicant's
prior Taxicab Driver License, For-Hire Driver License or TLC Driver License
expired unless such fines have been paid at the time of application.
   (k)   Authorized Driver Education Services Providers. Providers of training
and courses required by this Chapter must be approved by the Commission, must
administer the curriculum required by the Commission, and must comply with all
requirements set forth by the Commission. 
   (l)   Application Submission. Applicants must complete the application forms
provided by the Commission and must file the applications as directed by the
Commission. 
   (m)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and a current and valid E-mail Address. 
   (n)   Payment of Fines and Fees. 
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of, any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes payment of fines and fees owed as of the
date of the application by
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of the
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to the Applicant's failure to surrender a previously
revoked License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person
or in writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (o)   Material Changes in the Application. The Applicant must inform the
Chairperson of any material change in the information submitted as part of the
Application while the Application is pending. Material changes include, but are
not limited to: 
      (1)   Changes in Applicant's Chauffeur's License status;
      (2)   Changes in mailing address or E-mail address;
      (3)   Additional criminal convictions;
      (4)   Additional DMV convictions, including convictions for the offense
of operating a motor vehicle while impaired by alcohol or drugs; or
      (5)   Any change to the information provided or submitted with the
Application.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City
Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024;
amended City Record 5/7/2025, eff. 6/6/2025)
§ 80-05 Licensing – Paratransit Driver Authorization to Drive a Street Hail
Livery.
The holder of a Valid Paratransit Driver's License is authorized to drive a
Street Hail Livery for hire, subject to the provisions and requirements of this
chapter, including that the Paratransit Driver meets the eligibility
requirements of this Chapter and that the Paratransit Driver complies with all
requirements in this Chapter while operating a Street Hail Livery, BUT:
   (a)   The holder of a Valid Paratransit Driver's License is authorized ONLY
to drive an Accessible Street Hail Livery and
   (b)   The holder of a Valid Paratransit Driver's License must comply with
all requirements of this Chapter while operating an Accessible Street Hail
Livery.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-06 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   License Term. A License issued to a new Applicant will expire three
years from the date the License was issued. 
   (b)   Renewal License Term. A License issued to a renewing Applicant will
expire three years from the date on which the previous License expires. 
   (c)   Advancement. If a Licensee will not be available for drug testing
during the 90 days before his or her License is scheduled to expire, the
Licensee can ask the Commission to move and reset the License expiration to an
earlier date, provided that: 
      (1)   A Licensee makes only one such request during the term of a
License.
      (2)   The request is complete and accurate and submitted on the proper
Commission form.
   (d)   When to File for Renewal. 
      (1)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date may not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid and
cannot be used to drive a Vehicle after the License expiration date until the
application for renewal is approved by the Commission.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 180
days after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a
late fee of $25. When a late application is submitted, the License will remain
expired and not Valid to drive a Vehicle until the application for renewal is
approved by the Commission.
      (3)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (4)   A License cannot be renewed more than 180 days after the expiration
date.
   (e)   Suspended Licenses. 
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (d) of this section to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements means that the License cannot be renewed.
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends. This is true even if the Applicant has filed an
application for a renewal.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 80-07 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Fee for License. The fee for a TLC Driver License will be $84
annually. 
   (b)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal License must be
paid at the time the application is filed. 
   (c)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund fees
if it denies or disapproves the application. 
   (d)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application. 
   (e)   License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge a fee of $25 for
each License it issues to replace a lost, stolen or mutilated License. 
   (f)   Fees for Trainings and Other Courses. Participants in a training or
course required in this Chapter are responsible for any fees associated with
that training or course. 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-08 Licensing – Process and Causes for Denial of License.
   (a)   Fit to Hold a License - Applicant. The Chairperson will deny the
original or renewal License of any Applicant who fails to demonstrate that the
Applicant is Fit to Hold a License. The Chairperson will inform the Applicant,
in writing, of the specific reason(s) for this denial. The decision to deny a
license Application is in the discretion of the Chairperson. 
   (b)   Fit to Hold a License - Licensee. If at any time the Chairperson is
notified that a Driver no longer meets the requirements for licensure, the
Chairperson can deny the Driver's renewal application or may seek to suspend or
revoke his or her License. 
   (c)   Denial of an Application. The Chairperson can reject or deny a new
Application for a License for the reasons specified in this section. If, at the
time of submission of an Application by the Applicant, the Chairperson
identifies that the Applicant meets the criteria in this section, the
Chairperson will reject the Application and no Application fees will be
accepted. If the Application is accepted by the Chairperson for processing, no
Application fees will be refunded. 
      (1)   Three-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous three years, the Applicant has committed: 
         (i)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of driving a TLC licensed
Vehicle while impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content) or Drugs.
         (ii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, of bribery, fraud,
material misrepresentation, theft, threat against a person, harassment, abuse,
or use of physical force.
         (iii)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, involving the
possession of a Weapon in a Vehicle licensed under these Rules.
         (iv)   Any act, as prohibited by these Rules, resulting in the
revocation of a prior License, unless the prior License was revoked pursuant to
the mandatory penalties set forth in 35 RCNY §
80-02(e).
            A.   The three-year ban will apply if, while license revocation
charges were pending, a prior License expired or was surrendered to the
Chairperson.
            B.   Special Consideration for Persistent Violator Program
Revocations. After a minimum of one year from the date the Persistent Violator
summons is issued, an Applicant may request a waiver of the three-year ban from
the Chairperson. This request can only be made if the Applicant's driving
record reflects no more than three points for violations that occurred during
the three year period preceding the date of the request for the waiver. 
         (v)   Any act resulting in the disqualification of an applicant from
the examination specified in 35 RCNY § 
80-04(j)(2). The three-year ban will be counted from the date of the
examination the applicant was disqualified from. 
      (2)   One-Year Ban. The Chairperson can deny an Application if, during
the previous one year, the Applicant has committed: 
         (i)   More than three Collisions within a single year. The one-year
ban will be counted from the date of the last Collision.
         (ii)   The traffic infraction of unlicensed operation of a motor
vehicle. The one-year ban will be counted from the date of the violation.
         (iii)   Prior Application Denied. The Chairperson will deny an
Application that is submitted within one year after the submission of a prior
Application, if the previous Application was denied because the Applicant was
found not Fit to Hold a License. The one-year ban will be counted from the date
the prior Application was submitted to the Commission. 
         (iv)   Illegal use of Drugs, as determined by the Commission following
a drug test required by the Commission. This includes where the drug test
result was unchallenged or unsuccessfully challenged. The one-year ban will run
from the date of the failed drug test. 
      (3)   Other Reasons for Denial of an Application. 
         (i)   Mistake or Omission in the Application. The Chairperson can deny
an Application if the Application includes any material mistake or omission, or
if the Applicant fails to inform the Chairperson of any material change in the
Application. 
         (ii)   Eligible for Persistent Violator Penalty. The Chairperson can
deny an Application if the Applicant would, if licensed, be subject to License
suspension or revocation under the Persistent Violator Program at the time the
Application is submitted. 
            A.   For purposes of this subparagraph, TLC will consider DMV
points accrued no earlier than 15 months prior to the date of the application
in order to determine whether the new applicant meets the Persistent Violator
Program standard.
         (iii)   Pendency of Criminal Charges. The Chairperson will defer
consideration of an Application if the Applicant has criminal charges pending.
If the charges are not resolved within 90 days after the submission of the
Application, the Application will be denied. 
      (4)   Settlements. When settling charges which may result in the
revocation of a License, the Chairperson and the Respondent in that proceeding
may agree to a ban on applying for a new License different than that provided
for in these rules, provided that the agreement is in writing. 
   (d)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements. 
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all of the requirements of an Application within 90
days of the date the Application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will deny an Application for a renewal License if
the Applicant has not completed all of the requirements of an Application
within 180 days after the expiration date of the prior License.
      (3)   The Chairperson will not deny an Application under this Rule if
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
and the Applicant has complied with any requests made by the Chairperson.
   (e)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
Application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the Application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in denial of the
application. 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City
Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 80-09 [Reserved.]
§ 80-10 Licensing – Care and Use of License.
   (a)   Loss or Theft of License. A Driver must notify the Commission in
writing of the loss or theft of his or her TLC Driver License within 72 hours
(not counting weekends and holidays). 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-10(a)
 
   (b)   Unreadable License. A Driver must immediately surrender any unreadable
or unrecognizable TLC Driver License to the Commission for replacement and
reissue. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-10(b)
 
   (c)   Restrictions on License. A Driver must comply with all restrictions
upon his or her Chauffeur's License. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-10(c)
 
   (d)   No Alteration. A Driver must not alter in any way any portion of his
TLC Driver License or the attached photograph. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-10(d)
 
   (e)   Keep Likeness Updated. Whenever a Driver's physical appearance has
changed to any significant extent, the Driver must contact the Commission and
arrange to have a new photograph of him- or herself taken at the Commission
offices. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-10(e)
 
   (f)   Surrender of License. A Driver must surrender his or her License to
the Commission immediately upon revocation of the License. The License must be
surrendered within thirty days of the date of revocation. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 to be paid if Driver applies for a new Appearance N/A
80-10(f)    License of any type.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-11 Comply with Laws – Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   Driver Must Have Valid TLC Driver License. 
      (1)   A driver must not operate a Taxicab, a For-Hire Vehicle and/or a
Street Hail Livery in the City of New York while his or her TLC Driver License
is revoked, suspended or expired.
      (2)   A Paratransit Driver must not operate an Accessible Street Hail
Livery in the City of New York while his or her Paratransit Driver's License is
revoked, suspended, or expired.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: First Violation: $350.
80-11(a)    Second Violation in 36 months: $500. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Third Violation: revocation.
 
   (b)   Any driver who operates a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail
Livery after his or her License expires and before a renewal License is issued
is engaged in Unlicensed Activity.
   (c)   Driver Must Have Valid Chauffer's License. 
      (1)   A Driver must not operate a Taxicab, a For-Hire Vehicle or a Street
Hail Livery without a Valid Chauffeur's License. The License of a Driver who
operates a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery without a Valid
Chauffer's License will be summarily suspended.
      (2)   A Driver must not operate a Taxicab, a For-Hire Vehicle or a Street
Hail Livery if the Driver’s driving privileges in New York State have been
suspended or revoked.
      (3)   A Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle which is not exempt from NYS
Department of Transportation authorization and inspection requirements must be
in compliance with Article 19-A of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
Driving a non-exempt vehicle that is not in compliance with Article 19-
A constitutes the same offense as driving a For-Hire Vehicle without a Valid
License.
 
                Fine: First Violation: $350 and
35 RCNY §      Suspension until compliance.
80-11(c)(1)-(3) Second Violation in 36 months: $500 and Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               Suspension until compliance.
                Third Violation: revocation.
 
      (4)   A driver must immediately surrender his or her TLC Driver License
to the Commission upon the revocation of his or her New York State Chauffeur’s
License or upon the revocation of the driver’s New York State Driving
privileges.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-11(c)(4)
 
   (d)   Vehicle Must Be Licensed. A Driver must not knowingly operate a
vehicle for hire unless it is a Licensed Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street
Hail Livery. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-11(d)    day suspension.
 
   (e)   No Unauthorized Use of TLC Driver License. A Driver must not permit
any other person to use the Driver's TLC Driver License or Technology System
login credentials while operating any vehicle. A Driver must not use any other
Driver's TLC License or Technology System login credentials while operating any
Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
80-11(e)
 
   (f)   No Unlicensed Use of Vehicle. 
      (1)   A Driver must not permit a Vehicle to be operated for hire by a
person who does not have a Valid TLC Driver License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-11(f)(1) day suspension.
 
      (2)   During the work shift a Driver must not allow another person to
operate the Vehicle or occupy the Driver's seat, except in the event of an
emergency.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-11(f)(2)
 
   (g)   No Unauthorized Use of Approved Tablet for Interior Advertising. A
Driver must not permit any other person to use the Driver’s Interior
Advertising System login credentials while operating any Vehicle. A Driver must
not use any other Driver’s Interior Advertising System login credentials while
operating any Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
80-11(g)    hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City
Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-12 Comply with Laws – Proper Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery. 
      (1)   Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not offer or give any gift,
gratuity or thing of value to any employee, representative or member of the
Commission or any other public servant. 
      (2)   Do Not Offer Gift to Airport or Transportation Terminal Staff. A
Licensee must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing of value to anyone
at the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, LIRR, Metro- North, or any
similar airport or other transportation terminal who is employed to do the
following: 
         (i)   Ground transportation information services,
         (ii)   Dispatching service,
         (iii)   Security services,
         (iv)   Traffic and parking control, or
         (v)   Baggage handling.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(a)(1)-(2)
 
   (b)   Failure to Report Bribery. A Licensee must immediately report to the
Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation any request or demand for a
gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee, representative or member of
the Commission or any other public servant. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or minimum 5day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(b)    day suspension.
 
   (c)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, any act of fraud,
misrepresentation or theft. 
 
            Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or minimum 5 day to
35 RCNY §  maximum 60 day suspension, plus restitution if Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(c)    theft.
            Points: 4
 
   (d)   Acts Against Public Interest. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not deliberately perform or
fail to perform, alone or with another, any act where the act or failure to
perform such act is against the best interests of the public, although not
specifically mentioned in these rules. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or minimum 5 day to
80-12(d)    maximum 30 day suspension.                Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, a Licensee must not threaten, harass, or abuse
any person, and must not distract or attempt to distract any Service Animal. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or minimum 5 day to
80-12(e)    maximum 30 day suspension.                  Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee or any act in connection with those duties, a
Licensee must not use or attempt to use any physical force against a person or
Service Animal. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or minimum 5 day to
80-12(f)    maximum 60 day suspension.                  Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 4
 
   (g)   Threat or Harm to Service Animal. A Licensee must not distract, harm
or use physical force against or attempt to distract, harm or use physical
force against a Service Animal accompanying a Person with a Disability. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or minimum 5 day to
80-12(g)    maximum 60 day suspension.                  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Points: 4
 
   (h)   Notice of Criminal Conviction. 
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission in writing within 15 calendar
days after any criminal conviction of the Licensee.
      (2)   Licensee must also provide the Commission with a certified copy of
the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the court within 15 days
after sentencing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-12(h)    hearing; $250 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (i)   Cooperate with the Commission. 
      (1)   A Driver must truthfully answer all questions and promptly comply
with all communications, directives, and summonses issued by the Commission or
its representatives, including the NYC Department of Investigation.
      (2)   Upon request of the Commission, a Driver must produce any license,
Rate Card, Trip Record or other documents Licensee is required to have or be
reasonably able to obtain, whenever the Commission requires it.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance. Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(i)(1)-(2)
 
      (3)   A Driver must report any change of Mailing Address and E-mail
Address to the Commission in a manner prescribed by the Commission within ten
days.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-12(i)(3) $50 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
         (i)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to
the last Mailing Address provided by the Driver.
      (4)   A Driver must remove all currency from the Vehicle's interior prior
to its examination by any Commission personnel.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-12(i)(4)
 
   (5)   A Driver must cooperate with all dispatchers at public transportation
terminals.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
80-12(i)(5) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (j)   Cooperate with Law Enforcement. 
      (1)   A Driver must cooperate, including but not limited to providing
such Driver's name, License number, and any documents the Driver is required to
have in their possession, with all law enforcement officers and all authorized
representatives of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
80-12(j)    hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (k)   No Use of Vehicle for Unlawful Purpose. A Driver must not use or
permit any other person to use his or her Vehicle for any unlawful purpose. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(k)    day suspension.
 
   (l)   Report Attempt to Use Vehicle for Unlawful Purpose. A Driver must
report immediately to the police any attempt to use his or her Vehicle to
commit a crime or escape from the scene of a crime. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(l)
 
   (m)   No Concealment of Crime. A Driver must not conceal any evidence of a
crime or voluntarily aid violators to escape arrest. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(m)    days.
 
   (n)   Facilitation of Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. A Licensee must not
Facilitate Sex Trafficking with a Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-12(n)
 
   (o)   Sexual Harassment. While performing the duties and responsibilities of
a Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in the sexual harassment of any person. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and mandatory suspension of 30
80-12(o)    days and/or revocation.                     Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
   (p)   Sexual Contact. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, a Licensee must not engage in sexual contact with any person. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $2,000 and mandatory revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
80-12(p)
 
   (q)   No use of Approved Tablet for Unlawful Purpose. A Driver must not use
or permit any other person to use an Approved Tablet for any unlawful purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
80-12(q)    hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 8/19/2019,
eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City
Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-13 Comply with Laws – Traffic Laws & Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Comply with Traffic Laws. Drivers of Taxicabs, For-Hire Vehicles and
Street Hail Liveries (including any authorized driver of a Paratransit Vehicle
while driving a Street Hail Livery) must comply with all applicable traffic
laws, rules, and regulations. Drivers of Taxicabs, For-Hire Vehicles and Street
Hail Liveries (including any authorized Driver of a Paratransit Vehicle while
driving a Street Hail Livery) are subject to additional fines and penalties
that will be imposed by the Commission for violating the traffic laws as
follows: 
      (1)   Laws, rules or regulations governing stationary vehicles.
         (i)   Except where expressly forbidden, a Vehicle is permitted to stop
and wait for Passengers in the space immediately in front of a fire hydrant on
a street, provided the Driver remains seated in his or her Vehicle, ready for
operation at all times.
 
            First Violation:
            Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing; $200
            if found guilty following a hearing.

            Second violation within 15 months:
            Fine and Point: $100 and 1 point if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $200 and 1 point if found guilty
            following a hearing.
35 RCNY §                                                      Appearance NOT
80-13(a)(1) Third (and subsequent) violation(s) within 15       REQUIRED
            months:
            Fine and Points: $200 and 1 point if plead guilty
            before a hearing, and suspension; $300 and 1 point
            if found guilty following a hearing, and
            suspension. The suspension is deferred for 60 days;
            if the Driver completes a Vision Zero and
            Accessibility Remedial education course within the
            60-day period, the Driver will not be suspended.  
 
      (2)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles, other than
those defined by paragraph (3) of this subdivision.
 
            First violation:
            Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a hearing; $300
            found guilty following a hearing.

            Second violation within 15 months:
            Fine and Points: $200 and 1 point if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $300 and 1 point if found guilty
            following a hearing.
35 RCNY §                                                      Appearance NOT
80-13(a)(2) Third (and subsequent) violation(s) within 15       REQUIRED
            months:
            Fine and Points: $300 and 1 point if plead guilty
            before a hearing, and suspension; $400 and 1 point
            if found guilty following a hearing, and
            suspension. The suspension is deferred for 60 days;
            if the Driver completes a Vision Zero and
            Accessibility Remedial education course within the
            60-day period, the Driver will not be suspended.  
 
      (3)   Laws, rules or regulations governing moving vehicles that involve
hazardous moving violations, defined as follows:
 
            Fine: $300 if plead guilty before a
35 RCNY §  hearing; $400 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-13(a)(3) hearing, for each violation below.
            Points: As listed below.
 
Rule VIOLATION Points
Rule              VIOLATION                                              Points
35 RCNY §        SPEEDING 1 to 10 miles above posted speed limit        3
80-13(a)(3)(i)(A)
35 RCNY §        SPEEDING 11 to 20 miles above posted speed limit       4
80-13(a)(3)(i)(B)
35 RCNY §        SPEEDING 21 to 30 miles above posted speed limit       5
80-13(a)(3)(i)(C)
35 RCNY §        SPEEDING 31 to 40 miles above posted speed limit       6
80-13(a)(3)(i)(D)
35 RCNY §        SPEEDING 41or more miles above posted speed limit      8
80-13(a)(3)(i)(E)
35 RCNY §        Failing to stop for school bus                         5
80-13(a)(3)(ii)
35 RCNY §        Following too closely (tailgating)                     4
80-13(a)(3)(iii)
35 RCNY §        Inadequate brakes (own vehicle)                        4
80-13(a)(3)(iv)
35 RCNY §        Inadequate brakes (employer's vehicle)                 2
80-13(a)(3)(v)
35 RCNY §        Failing to yield right-of-way                          3
80-13(a)(3)(vi)
35 RCNY §        Traffic signal violation                               3
80-13(a)(3)(vii)
35 RCNY §        Stop sign violation                                    3
80-13(a)(3)(viii)
35 RCNY §        Yield sign violation                                   3
80-13(a)(3)(ix)
35 RCNY §        Railroad crossing violation                            3
80-13(a)(3)(x)
35 RCNY §        Improper passing                                       3
80-13(a)(3)(xi)
35 RCNY §        Unsafe lane change                                     3
80-13(a)(3)(xii)
35 RCNY §        Driving left of center                                 3
80-13(a)(3)(xiii)
35 RCNY §        Driving in wrong direction                             3
80-13(a)(3)(xiv)
35 RCNY §        Leaving scene of an accident involving property damage 3
80-13(a)(3)(xv)   or injury to animal
 
      (4)   Report Before Leaving Scene. A Driver who knows or should have
known that a Collision involving the Driver's Vehicle resulted in personal
injury to another or damage to another's property must stop before leaving the
scene of the Collision, and if the other involved party is present, must: 
         (i)   Show his or her Chauffeur's License, TLC License (and, where
applicable, Rate Card or Vehicle License) to the other party involved in the
incident.
         (ii)   Give the other involved party or the police his or her name,
Chauffeur's License number, TLC Driver License and any other vehicle and
license type identification, as well as the name of the Vehicle's insurance
carrier and the insurance policy number.
 
            Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days or
35 RCNY §  revocation if Driver is found guilty of having
80-13(a)(4) violated this rule more than 3 times within a  Appearance REQUIRED
            12-month period.
            Points: 3
 
      (5)   Notify Vehicle Owner of Collision. If the Driver is involved in a
Collision, the Driver must immediately report the Collision to the owner of the
Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-13(a)(5) Points: 3
 
      (6)   Payment of Traffic Judgments. The holder of a Driver's License
issued under this chapter must satisfy any outstanding judgment and pay any
civil penalty owed for a traffic violation in a Issuing Jurisdiction or a
violation of the regulations of a Issuing Jurisdiction. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-13(a)(5) Points: 3
 
   (b)   Workers' Compensation Laws. 
      (1)   A Driver who suffers a disabling work-related injury and has filed
for Workers' Compensation benefits must:
         (i)   Surrender his or her TLC Driver License to the Commission
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $75 Appearance REQUIRED
80-13(b)(1)(i)
 
         (ii)   Cease driving while claiming a disability. If a Driver files
for Workers' Compensation benefits claiming an injury that prevents the Driver
from working as a Driver, the Driver must stop driving as a For-Hire Driver and
return his or her Driver License to the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $150 Appearance REQUIRED
80-13(b)(1)(ii)
 
      (2)   Return to Work. 
         (i)   The Driver's License will be returned when the Driver submits
documentation to the Commission that he or she has recovered and is no longer
receiving Workers' Compensation benefits.
         (ii)   Where applicable, the owner of the Taxicab is required to
provide the Driver with documentation indicating that the Workers' Compensation
benefits have ended, as provided in 35 RCNY §
58-14(d).
   (c)   MTA Tax: Taxicab and Street Hail Livery Trips.
      (1)   For all trips completed in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery where
the MTA Tax must be charged as required by 35 RCNY §
80-17(g):
         (i)   A Driver of a Taxicab who is not a Taxpayer must pay the
Taxpayer the MTA Tax collected for each Taxicab trip for which the MTA Tax is
due.
         (ii)   A Street Hail Livery Driver must pay the Street Hail Livery
Base with which the Street Hail Livery is affiliated the MTA Tax collected for
each trip for which the MTA Tax is due.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 per occurrence Appearance REQUIRED
80-13(c)(1)
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/7/2025,
eff. 6/6/2025)
§ 80-14 Operations – Passenger and Driver Safety.
   (a)   Reckless Driving Rule. A Driver must not operate his or her Vehicle in
a manner that would violate section 1212 of the NYS Vehicle and Traffic Law. 
 
            Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30
35 RCNY §  days, or revocation if Driver is found guilty
80-14(a)    of having violated this rule more than three   Appearance REQUIRED
            times within an 18-month period.
            Points: 4
 
   (b)   Driving While Impaired. 
      (1)   A Driver must not operate a Vehicle while his or her driving
ability is impaired by intoxicating liquor (regardless of its alcoholic
content) or while he or she is under the influence of Drugs.
      (2)   A Driver must not drive or occupy his or her Vehicle for at least
six hours after consuming any intoxicating liquor regardless of its alcoholic
content, or any Drugs.
      (3)   A Driver may be charged with Driving While Impaired regardless and
independent of any of the Driver's previous Drug Test results.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
80-14(b)
 
   (c)   Drug Testing for Cause. If the Commission has a reasonable suspicion
that a Driver has used a Drug that makes him or her unfit to operate a Vehicle
safely, the Commission can direct the Driver to be tested, at the Driver's
expense, by a Commission-approved person, licensed by the NYS Department of
Health, and the Driver must comply. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Summary suspension until compliance. Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-14(c)     
 
   (d)   Annual Drug Testing. 
      (1)   All Drivers except (1) Drivers who are City of New York Police
Officers or (2) Paratransit drivers, must be tested annually, at the Driver's
expense, for Drugs in order to retain Valid Licenses.
      (2)   The drug testing must be performed by an individual or entity
designated by the Commission and possessing a requisite permit issued by the
New York State Department of Health.
      (3)   For Drivers in the first year of a three-year License, the testing
must occur no sooner than 90 days before the one-year anniversary date of the
License, and not after the one-year anniversary date.
 
35 RCNY §  Summary suspension until compliance. $200 if           Appearance
80-14(d)(3) compliance is more than 30 days after the deadline.   NOT REQUIRED
 
      (4)   For Drivers in the second year of a three-year License, the testing
must occur no sooner than 90 days before the second-year anniversary date of
the License, and not after the second-year anniversary date.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-14(d)(4) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing and suspension until compliance.
 
      (5)   For Drivers in the third year of a three-year License, the annual
drug testing must occur no sooner than 90 days before the License expiration
date.
 
35 RCNY §  If the Driver fails to be tested within
80-14(d)(5) this time period, his or her License will Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            expire and will not be renewed.
 
   (e)   Results of Drug Test. Driver must pass every drug test, including "For
Cause" drug tests under 35 RCNY §
80-14(c) and "Annual" drug tests under 35 RCNY §
80-14(d). If the results of either test are positive, or if the sample cannot
be tested, the Driver's License shall be summarily suspended, and can be
revoked after a hearing. 
 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Summary suspension and revocation.  Appearance REQUIRED
80-14(e)
 
   (f)   Limits on Hours of Driving. 
      (1)   Generally. A Driver must not transport any Passenger(s) for hire in
excess of the daily and weekly limits detailed in this subdivision.
         (i)   Daily and weekly driving hours will be calculated by adding up
the time that passengers are being transported for hire. Time between trips
will not be counted as driving hours. 
         (ii)   The pickups that a Driver makes while operating any Vehicle
pursuant to this Chapter will be combined for the purpose of counting hours
toward the daily or weekly limit. 
         (iii)   If any time exceeds the daily limit and serves as the basis
for a violation of the daily limit, such time cannot also be counted toward a
violation of the weekly limit. 
         (iv)   It is a defense to a violation of the limits set forth in this
subdivision that any such limit was exceeded because of a single trip that
began before the limit was reached. 
      (2)   Daily Limit. A Driver must not transport any Passenger(s) for hire
for more than 10 hours in total in any 24-hour period. Exception: If a Driver
transports no Passengers for hire for at least eight consecutive hours, the 10-
hour count resets and such Driver may resume picking up Passengers for hire. 
 
            Hours above the daily limit:
            No more than 1 hour: $50 if plead guilty
            before a hearing; and $75 if found guilty
            following a hearing.
            Over 1 hour but no more than 2 hours: $100
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $150
            if found guilty following a hearing.
            Over 2 hours but no more than 3 hours: $150
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $200
35 RCNY §  if found guilty following a hearing.
80-14(f)(2) Over 3 hours but no more than 4 hours: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $300
            if found guilty following a hearing.
            Over 4 hours: $300 if plead guilty before a
            hearing; and $400 if found guilty following
            a hearing.
            If guilty of three or more violations in a
            calendar month for exceeding the daily
            limit by four or more hours, penalty shall
            also include a suspension of at least 5
            days but no more than 15 days.
 
      (3)   Weekly Limit. A Driver must not transport any Passenger(s) for hire
for more than 60 hours in total in any seven-day period that begins on Monday
and ends on Sunday. 
 
            Hours above the weekly limit:
            No more than 1 hour: $50 if plead guilty
            before a hearing; and $75 if found guilty
            following a hearing.
            Over 1 hour but no more than 2 hours: $100
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $150
            if found guilty following a hearing.
            Over 2 hours but no more than 3 hours: $150
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $200
35 RCNY §  if found guilty following a hearing.
80-14(f)(3) Over 3 hours but no more than 4 hours: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            if plead guilty before a hearing; and $300
            if found guilty following a hearing.
            Over 4 hours: $300 if plead guilty before a
            hearing; and $400 if found guilty following
            a hearing.
            If guilty of three or more violations in a
            calendar month for exceeding the weekly
            limit by four or more hours, penalty shall
            also include a suspension of at least 5
            days but not more than 15 days.
 
   (g)   Use of Electronic Communication Device or Approved Tablet. 
      (1)   A Driver must not Use an Electronic Communication Device or
Approved Tablet while operating a Vehicle. A Driver can Use an Electronic
Communication Device only while the Vehicle is lawfully standing or parked.
 
            Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
            hearing; $350 if found guilty following a
            hearing, and suspension. The suspension is
            deferred for 60 days; if the Driver
            completes a Distracted Driving Portable
35 RCNY §  Electronic Device Course within the 60-day  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-14(g)(1) period then the Driver will not be
            suspended.  
            Points: 3 for the first offense and for the
            second offense in any 15-month period; 4
            for the third offense in any 15-month
            period.
 
      (2)   In addition to the penalties provided above for any violation of
this Rule, a Driver convicted of a violation of this Rule must complete a
Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course no later than 60 days
after the date of conviction. The license of a Driver who does not complete the
Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course within the 60 day period
will be suspended until compliance. The Driver must provide proof that the
course was completed. In instances where the Chairperson has not received proof
of completion of a Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course from a
TLC Distracted Driving Portable Electronic Device Course provider, the
Chairperson will provide notice to the Driver prior to suspension that the
Driver has a specified time of no less than 10 days from the date of the notice
to provide proof of completion of a Distracted Driving Portable Electronic
Device Course to the Chairperson by mail.
      (3)   Affirmative Defense. A Driver can offer an affirmative defense to a
charge of Using an Electronic Communication Device under this Rule if all of
the following are true: 
         (i)   The communication was to an emergency response operator;
         (ii)   The communication reports an imminent threat to life or
property;
         (iii)   The Driver could not safely stop the Vehicle to make the
report; and
         (iv)   The Driver provides documentary proof of communication with an
emergency response provider.
   (h)   Serious Crashes. A Serious Crash is one in which any person has
suffered Critical Injury or death. "Critical Injury," for purposes of this
subdivision, means any injury determined to be critical by the emergency
medical service personnel responding to such crash. 
      (1)   If a Driver has been issued a summons for or charged with one or
more traffic related violations or crimes in a Serious Crash, the Driver's
License may be Summarily Suspended, upon a finding that the Driver's conduct
was a substantial cause of the Serious Crash. Upon conviction of the Driver of
one or more of the violations or crimes stated in the summons or charges and
upon a determination that one or more of the violations or crimes for which
conviction occurred was a cause of Critical Injury or death, the Driver's
License will be revoked. A Summary Suspension pursuant to this section may be
lifted pursuant to this Title or upon dismissal of all such charges or upon a
finding of not guilty of all of the stated traffic related violations and
crimes, except that the Chairperson may continue to suspend the Driver's
License pursuant to an investigation into such Driver's fitness, and such
License may be revoked if the Driver is found not Fit to Hold a License (see
paragraph (2)). This subdivision does not limit in any way the Chairperson's
authority to Summarily Suspend a Driver for other reasons.
         (a)   After any Serious Crash of which the TLC is notified involving a
Driver operating a Licensed Vehicle, the TLC will review whether the Driver is
Fit to Hold a License under 35 RCNY
80-08(b). The TLC can seek Suspension or Revocation of the Driver's License and
can Summarily Suspend the Driver's License while any fitness review or
enforcement action is pending, in accordance with 35 RCNY §
68-15.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/13/2017,
eff. 3/15/2017; amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; amended City
Record 10/12/2018, eff. 11/11/2018; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/
2021; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 2/4/
2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-15 Operations – General Rules During Operation of Vehicle.
   (a)   No Weapons. While operating a Vehicle, a Driver must not have a Weapon
or any other instrument intended to be used as a weapon in his or her
possession or in the Vehicle without the written permission of the
Chairperson. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Revocation. Appearance REQUIRED
80-15(a)
 
   (b)   No Smoking. A Driver must not smoke in a Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance REQUIRED
80-15(b)
 
   (c)   Locking Vehicle Doors. 
      (1)   While on duty and operating for-hire, a Driver must not lock either
of the rear doors except with the consent or at the request of a Passenger or
for a reason specified in these rules.
 
            Fine if Passenger inside the Vehicle: $300 if
            plead guilty before a hearing; $400 if found
            guilty following a hearing and/or minimum 5 day
35 RCNY §  to maximum 30 day suspension.                   Appearance REQUIRED
80-15(c)(1) Points: 2
            Fine if Passenger outside the Vehicle: $50 if
            plead guilty before a hearing; $100 if found
            guilty following a hearing.
 
      (2)   A Driver is permitted to lock the front doors. However, a Driver
must not refuse to transport a party of four, where one person must occupy the
front seat, because the front doors are locked. Such refusal to unlock the
front doors is a violation of 35 RCNY §
80-15(f)(1).
   (d)   E-ZPass® Rules. 
      (1)   A Driver must not operate a Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street
Hail Livery Vehicle for hire that is not equipped with an E-ZPass® tag.
      (2)   The Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery Driver must use
E-ZPass® at all crossings within the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority, Triboro Bridge and Tunnel Authority, and wherever
else E- ZPass® is accepted.
      (3)   Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery Drivers may use
personal E-ZPass® tags to meet this requirement.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-15(d)(1)-(3) hearing; $150 if found guilty following Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                a hearing.
 
      (4)   A Taxicab, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery Driver must
forward all tolls paid by the Passengers to the holder of the E-ZPass® tag at
the end of his or her shift or lease period.
      (5)   If Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver has been required to
establish a replenishment account, as described in 35 RCNY §
58-27(d)(2) of the Taxicab Owners chapter, the Driver must maintain the
required balance in the account.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 plus restitution to the E-ZPass® tag holder of any amount not Appearance
80-15(d)    reimbursed.                                                              REQUIRED
(4)-(5)
 
   (e)   Overloading Vehicle. 
      (1)   A Driver of a Taxicab or a Street Hail Livery must not permit more
than four Passengers to ride in a four-Passenger Vehicle, nor more than five
Passengers in a five-Passenger Vehicle, except that an additional Passenger
must be accepted if the Passenger is under the age of seven (7) and is held on
the lap of an adult Passenger seated in the rear.
      (2)   A Driver must not permit a Vehicle to be overloaded or to carry
more Passengers than the Vehicle is equipped to seat based on the NYS DMV
registration of the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-15(e)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Use of Front Seat. 
      (1)   A Driver must not refuse to transport a party of four, where one
Passenger must occupy the front seat.
      (2)   A Passenger who is unable to enter or ride in the rear seat of the
Vehicle must be permitted to occupy the front passenger seat.
      (3)   If a Passenger's luggage, wheelchair, crutches, other mobility aid
or other property occupies the rear seats of the Vehicle, a Passenger must be
permitted to occupy the front passenger seat.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-15(f)
 
   (g)   No Marketing to Passengers. A Driver must not sell, advertise or
recommend any service or merchandise to any Passenger without prior written
Commission approval. Exception: A Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail
Livery can promote the services offered by the vehicle's affiliated Base. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance REQUIRED
80-15(g)
 
   (h)   No Taxicab Subleases. A Driver who is leasing a Taxicab must not
sublease the Taxicab. 
 
            Fine: First Violation: $100.
35 RCNY §  Second Violation: $200.                       Appearance REQUIRED
80-15(h)    Third Violation: $300 and/or minimum 5 day to
            maximum 30 day suspension.
 
   (i)   Courtesy. A Driver must be courteous to Passengers. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
80-15(i)    hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (j)   Parking at Livery Base. While stopped at his or her affiliated Base, a
Livery Driver must use the off- street parking facilities provided by the Base
Station Owner and must comply with all applicable traffic and parking
regulations. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-15(j)
 
   (k)   Nuisance Behavior at Base. A Driver stopped at the Base with which the
Driver's Vehicle is affiliated or from which the Driver is being dispatched
must not create a nuisance such as, but not limited to: 
      (1)   Engaging in littering,
      (2)   Playing of loud audio material, or
      (3)   Horn honking.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-15(k)
 
   (l)   No Horn Honking. A Driver must not engage in horn-honking that
violates traffic rules and regulations. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-15(l)
 
   (m)   Prohibited Advertising. A Driver must not display any advertising on
the interior of a For-Hire Vehicle unless the advertising has been authorized
by the Commission.
 
            Fine: First violation: $250 if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $350 if found guilty
35 RCNY §  following a hearing; Second and subsequent  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-15(m)    violations: $350 if plead guilty before a
            hearing; $450 if found guilty following a
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-16 Operations – Comply with Reasonable Passenger Requests.
   (a)   Specific Route. 
      (1)   The Driver must comply with all reasonable and lawful routing
requests of the Passenger. 
      (2)   Unless a Passenger makes a specific request, a Driver must proceed
to the Passenger's destination by the shortest reasonable route.
 
                   Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
35 RCNY § 80-16(a)hearing; $150 if found guilty       Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                   following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Requests to Change Destination. Passengers may ask the Driver to
change their destination or end their ride during their trip. Drivers must
comply with these requests unless it is impossible or unsafe. For Hail trips
the Passenger will pay the amount shown on the Taximeter or information monitor
when the trip ends. For a Pre-Arranged Trip in a Street Hail Livery or a trip
in a For-Hire Vehicle, or a Pre-Arranged Trip in a Taxi or Street Hail Livery
using Flex Fare price, a request to change or terminate the trip can result in
a different fare or, for a trip which terminates early, the complete fare
quoted. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-16(b)    $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (c)   Request to Load Luggage. Upon the request of a Passenger, the Driver
must load or unload a Passenger's luggage, wheelchair, crutches or other
property into or out of the Vehicle's interior or trunk compartment, and must
securely close the door or trunk compartment. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-16(c)
 
   (d)   Passenger Receipt for Taxi and SHL trips. 
      (1)   At the end of a trip in a Taxicab or a hail trip in a Street Hail
Livery, a Driver, personally or via the Technology System or other electronic
means, must offer a Passenger a receipt for payment of fare,
      (2)   When a Passenger requests a receipt, personally or via the
Technology System or other electronic means, a Driver must give a Passenger a
receipt for payment of the fare.
      (3)   The receipt must state the:
         (i)   date;
         (ii)   time;
         (iii)   Medallion number or Street Hail Livery license number;
         (iv)   trip number;
         (v)   total fare;
         (vi)   tolls;
         (vii)   surcharges;
         (viii)   extras;.
         (ix)   tip, if paid by credit/debit card;
         (x)   last four digits of card account number, if applicable;
         (xi)   Driver's hack license number; and
         (xii)   the "311" Commission Complaint telephone number.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
80-16(d)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Points: 1
 
   (e)   Request to Adjust Audio. 
      (1)   All audio equipment controlled by the Driver must be adjusted or
turned on or off at the request of the Passenger.
      (2)   The Passenger shall have the right to select what is played on the
audio equipment.
      (3)   Whether or not the Vehicle is engaged in a trip, an audio device
must be played at normal volume only, and must comply with all noise laws and
regulations.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-16(e)
 
   (f)   Request to Adjust Air Conditioning/Heat. At the request of a
Passenger, the Driver must turn the air conditioning or heating equipment on or
off. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-16(f)
 
   (g)   Provide License Upon Request. A Driver must provide comply with all
reasonable Passenger requests to provide his or her name, TLC Driver License
number (or the Paratransit Driver's License Number as applicable) and the
Medallion, For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery license number. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-16(g)    $200 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (h)   Other Reasonable Passenger Requests. A Driver must comply with all
other reasonable requests of a Passenger. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance REQUIRED
80-16(h)
 
   (i)   Request to Turn Off, Mute, or Control Volume of Approved Tablet. A
Passenger must be able to turn off any Passenger-facing screen (i.e. render the
screen blank and muted) at any time, without obstruction, as well as control
the volume of or mute any Passenger-facing device, without obstruction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-16(i)    $350 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City
Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-17 Operations – Rates, Charges and Payment.
   (a)   No Overcharges. 
      (1)   A Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must not charge or
attempt to charge a fare above the Commission-approved rates, including
Commission-approved Flex Fare Rate Schedule. This includes a fare in a Street
Hail Livery for a Hail Trip or a fare for any trip initiated or accepted
through an E-Hail Application, including a Flex Fare Trip.
      (2)   A Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail Livery on Pre-
Arranged Trips must not charge a Passenger more than the rate, fare quote, or
fare estimate provided to the Passenger by the Base pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-23 (unless the trip destination is changed by the Passenger after the
initial fare quote or fare estimate).
      (3)   A Driver must not impose or attempt to impose any additional charge
for transporting a person with a disability, a service animal accompanying a
person with a disability, or a wheelchair or other mobility aid.
      (4)   A Driver must not require a person with a disability to be
accompanied by an attendant. However, if a person with a disability is
accompanied by an attendant, the Driver must not impose or attempt to impose
any additional charge for transporting the attendant.
 
35 RCNY §      Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-17(a)(1)-(4) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (5)   A Driver must give the correct change to a Passenger who has paid
the fare.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
80-17(a)(5) $100 if found guilty following a hearing.   Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 2
 
      (6)   A Driver must not ask a Passenger for a tip or indicate that a tip
is expected or required.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Non-Paying Customers. If a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Passenger
refuses to pay the metered fare, the Driver of the Taxicab or Street Hail
Livery must place the meter in the off or "Vacant" position, record the amount
of fare on the Taximeter onto the Trip Record through the Technology System, or
onto the written Trip Record if the Technology System is not working, and
proceed directly to the nearest police precinct, present the facts to the
police and follow their instructions for resolving the dispute. 
   (c)   Currency. A Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver must accept United
States currency as fare payment. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(c)
 
   (d)   Making Change. 
      (1)   A Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must always be capable
of making change for a $20 bill during his or her work shift.
      (2)   If the Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is not able to
change a $20 bill, the Driver will, with the Passenger's consent, take the
following steps:
         (i)   Log off from the Technology System.
         (ii)   Transmit the relevant information to an electronic database for
entry on the electronic trip record or make an appropriate written trip record
entry.
         (iii)   Proceed to the nearest location where he or she may reasonably
expect to obtain change.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(d)
 
   (e)   Must Accept Credit/Debit Card Payment. 
      (1)   Taxicabs and Street Hail Livery Credit/Debit Card Payment. 
         (i)   All Taxicabs are required to be equipped with a Technology
System and Drivers must accept a Passenger's choice to pay by credit/debit
card.
         (ii)   All Street Hail Liveries are required to be equipped with a
Technology System and Drivers must accept a Passenger's choice to pay by
credit/debit card for Hail Trips.
         (iii)   A Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must not pick up
or transport a passenger when the system is incapable of accepting or
processing credit or debit card transactions, unless prior to engaging the
Taximeter, the Driver advises the Passenger that he/she will not be able to use
a credit or debit card for payment.
         (iv)   A Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must not accept
credit/debit card payments through any device other than the Vehicle's
Technology System or an approved E-Hail App.
         (v)   If a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery customer's effort to pay by
debit/credit card at the end of the trip is prevented not by the Vehicle's
Technology System, but because the communication network is unable to process
debit/credit card payments at that time, the Driver must offer the customer the
option of either paying cash or having the Driver continue to a location where
the wireless payment system can communicate with its network.
 
35 RCNY §         Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(e)(1)(i)-(v)
 
         (vi)   No Mark-up for Credit Payment. A Driver of a Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery must not charge any additional fee (mark-up) to any Passenger for
credit/debit card transactions for any Trip in a Taxicab or for any Hail Trip
in a Street Hail Livery. 
 
                Fine: First violation: $200.
                Second violation: $300.
                Third violation: $500.
35 RCNY §      In addition to the penalty payable to the  Appearance REQUIRED
80-17(e)(1)(vi) Commission, the administrative law judge
                may order the Driver to pay restitution to
                the Passenger, equal to the excess amount
                that was charged to the Passenger.
 
      (2)   For-Hire Vehicle Credit/Debit Card Payment. 
         (i)   All For-Hire Vehicle Drivers must accept a Passenger's choice to
pay by credit/debit card if credit card payment is available.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(e)(2)(i)
 
   (f)   Trips Beyond the City in a Taxi or Street Hail Livery. 
      (1)   In General. For a trip anywhere in a Taxi or Street Hail Livery
beyond the City of New York (other than to Westchester or Nassau counties or
Newark Airport), the following rules and charges apply: 
         (i)   The Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must negotiate a
flat rate trip charge with the Passenger before beginning the trip. (NOTE: A
"flat" rate means a dollar amount; "double the meter" is NOT a flat rate.)
         (ii)   The Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must place the
Taximeter in a recording position at the beginning of the trip and allow it to
continue recording
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(f)(1)
 
      (2)   For a trip to Westchester or Nassau County, the following charges
and rules apply:
         (i)   The Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must place the
Taximeter in a recording position at the start of the trip and must keep the
Taximeter in the recording position at all times.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(f)(2)(i)
 
         (ii)   Before starting the trip, the Driver of a Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery must inform the Passenger how the trip charges will be calculated,
including the payment of tolls both to and from the destination for Taxicabs
and 35 RCNY §
82-26(d)(2) for Street Hail Liveries.
            A.   The rate of fare will be the amount shown on the Taximeter for
the portion of the trip within the City, plus twice the amount shown on the
Taximeter for the portion of the trip outside the City limits (See 35 RCNY §
58-26(d)(2)).
         (iii)   The Driver of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must tell the
Passenger when the Vehicle crosses the City limits so that the Passenger can
check the reading on the Taximeter at that time.
 
35 RCNY §          Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(f)(2)(ii-iii)
 
         (iv)   The Passenger of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is also
responsible for all necessary tolls charged for both going to the destination
and for the Driver's return to the City.
      (3)   For a trip to Newark Airport, in a Taxi or a Street Hail Livery the
following charges and rules apply:
         (i)   The Driver of the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must place the
Taximeter in a recording position at the start of the trip and must keep the
Taximeter in the recording position at all times.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(f)(3)(i)
 
         (ii)   Before starting the trip, the Driver of the Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery Driver must inform the Passenger how the trip charges will be
calculated, including the payment of tolls out of and back into the City.
            A.   The rate of fare will be the amount shown on the Taximeter
plus a surcharge of $20.00 (See 35 RCNY §
58-26(c)(3) for Taxicabs and 35 RCNY §
82-26(c)(3) for Street Hail Liveries).
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(f)(3)(ii)
 
         (iii)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Passenger is also
responsible for all necessary tolls charged for both going to the destination
and for the Driver's return to the City.
   (g)   MTA Tax. The MTA Tax must be charged on any trip in a Taxicab or on
any Hail Trip in a Street Hail Livery that starts in New York City and ends in
any of: 
      (1)   New York City.
      (2)   Dutchess County.
      (3)   Nassau County.
      (4)   Orange County.
      (5)   Putnam County.
      (6)   Rockland County.
      (7)   Suffolk County.
      (8)   Westchester County.
   (h)   Taxicab Improvement Surcharge. For each trip in a Taxicab, the Driver
must remit the Taxicab Improvement Surcharge to the Taxicab Medallion Owner. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 per occurrence Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(h)
 
   (i)   Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge. For each Hail Trip in a
Street Hail Livery, the Driver must remit the Street Hail Livery Improvement
Surcharge to the Street Hail Livery Licensee. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 per occurrence Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(i)
 
   (j)   Taxicab and Street Hail Livery E-Payments. 
      (1)   A Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver must allow the Passenger to
pay by E-Payment as long as the E-Payment method complies with Commission
rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(j)(1)
 
      (2)   The payment must not exceed Commission-approved rates, including
Commission-approved Flex Fare Rate Schedules, plus any optional tip.
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-17(j)(2) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (3)   The fare must be calculated as required by these rules and the
Taximeter must be used for all trips, including trips paid for by E-Payment,
unless it is a Flex Fare Trip. Any fare paid for by E-Payment must be
calculated by the Taximeter and not by any other method, unless it is a Flex
Fare Trip.
      (4)   The itemized fare amount charged to the Passenger must be
automatically transmitted to the E- Hail Application from the Technology
System, or the Taximeter, unless it is a Flex Fare trip, and relevant payment
data necessary to obtain a complete trip record must be transmitted from the E-
Hail Application to the Technology System. Manual input of the fare by the
Driver or any other person into the E-Hail Application is not permitted.
      (5)   A Driver must not accept credit card payment from a Passenger by
any E-Hail Application that does not integrate with the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-17(j)(5)
 
   (k)   No Passenger Payment Through Approved Tablet. An Approved Tablet may
facilitate gratuities to the Driver through the means provided in
Subchapter 59B of 35 RCNY
Chapter 59. A Driver must not operate an Interior Advertising System capable of
collecting payment information from a passenger through any tablet.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 if plead guilty before a
80-17(k)    hearing; $350 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City
Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023;
amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 2/4/2025,
eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-18 Operations – Lost Property.
   (a)   Inspection Following Trips to and from Airports. Immediately after
completing a trip to Kennedy, La Guardia or Newark Airports, the Driver must
inspect the interior of the Vehicle and the trunk compartment, if used, to
ensure that Passengers have collected their property. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-18(a)
 
   (b)   Handling of Lost Property. 
      (1)   Property found by a Driver in a Taxicab must be returned to the
Passenger if possible; otherwise, it must be taken without delay to a police
precinct as directed by the NYPD.
      (2)   Property found by a Driver in a For-Hire Vehicle or Street Hail
Livery must be returned to the Passenger if possible; otherwise it must be
taken without delay to a police precinct as directed by the NYPD or to the
Vehicle's Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
80-18(b)
 
   (c)   A Driver cannot demand or request payment for the return of property
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
80-18(c)
 
   (d)   Notifying Commission Regarding Lost Property. If the property is not
returned to the Passenger, the Driver must promptly inform the Commission of
the details regarding the found property and the location where it is held. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-18(d)
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-19 Operations – Passenger Solicitation and Engagement.
   (a)   Limits on Driver Solicitation of Passengers in Taxicabs. 
      (1)   A Driver of a Taxicab must not use a person, other than a
dispatcher at a public transportation terminal, licensed E-Hail Application, or
an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, to solicit Passengers. Use of any licensed E-
Hail Application by the Driver is optional.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(a)(1)
 
      (2)   A Driver of a Taxicab must not pick up additional Passengers during
a trip except at the Passenger's request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(a)(2)
 
      (3)   A Driver of a Taxicab must not suggest to a current Passenger that
an additional person be accepted as a Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(a)(3)
 
      (4)   A Driver of a Taxicab must not solicit or cruise for the purpose of
soliciting Passengers:
         (i)   At Kennedy, La Guardia or Newark Airports.
         (ii)   Within 100 feet of any authorized Taxi Stand.
         (iii)   Within the private streets of Lincoln Center.
         (iv)   In any area of the City of New York where Taxicab cruising is
prohibited.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-19(a)(4) hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (5)   A Driver who is logged off from the Technology System must not
solicit or accept a Passenger unless ALL of the following are true:
         (i)   The Driver is returning the Taxicab to his or her garage or
home;
         (ii)   The Driver has transmitted the relevant information to an
electronic database for entry on the electronic trip record or made a written
trip record entry "Returning to garage (or home)"; and
         (iii)   The Passenger's destination is directly on the route to the
Driver's home or garage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(a)(5) $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Limits on Driver Solicitation of Passengers in Street Hail Liveries. 
      (1)   Exclusionary Zones. 
         (i)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not solicit Passengers in
the Hail Exclusionary Zone.
         (ii)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not accept a Pre-Arranged
Trip beginning in the Pre- Arranged Exclusionary Zone.
 
            Fine: First Violation: $500 and suspension;
35 RCNY §  Second Violation in 24 months: $750 and     Appearance REQUIRED
80-19(b)(1) suspension;
            Third Violation in 120 months: Revocation.
 
      (2)   Hail Zone. 
         (i)   Inside the Hail Zone, a Driver of a Street Hail Livery can
accept Passengers by Hail or can accept a Pre-Arranged Trip through a Base.
         (ii)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not solicit or cruise for
the purpose of soliciting Passengers within 100 feet of any authorized Taxi
Stand.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-19(b)(2)(ii) hearing; $150 if found guilty following Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                a hearing.
 
         (iii)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not use a person, other
than a dispatcher at a public transportation terminal, licensed E-Hail
Application, an Accessible Vehicle dispatcher, or a Street Hail Livery Base, to
solicit Passengers. Use of any licensed E-Hail Application by the Driver is
optional.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(b)(2)(iii)
 
      (3)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not pick up additional
Passengers during a trip except at the Passenger's request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(b)(3)
 
      (4)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery must not suggest to a current
Passenger that an additional person be accepted as a Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(b)(4)
 
      (5)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery who has indicated through the
Technology System that he or she is on-duty unavailable for the purposes of
accepting a Pre-Arranged trip must not solicit or accept a Passenger for a Hail
Trip.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(b)(5) $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
      (6)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery who has indicated in the meter or
through the Technology System that he or she is off duty must not solicit or
accept a Passenger unless ALL of the following are true:
         (i)   The Driver is in the Hail Zone;
         (ii)   The Driver is returning the Street Hail Livery to his or her
Base or home;
         (iii)   The Driver has transmitted the relevant information to an
electronic database for entry on the electronic trip record or made a written
trip record entry; and
         (iv)   The Passenger's destination is directly on the route to the
Driver's home or garage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(b)(6) $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (c)   Limits on Driver Solicitation of Passengers in For-Hire Vehicles. 
      (1)   A Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle must not solicit or pick up
Passengers other than by prearrangement through a licensed Base of the class
that can dispatch the Driver's For-Hire Vehicle.
 
            Fine: First Violation: $200 - $350.
35 RCNY §  Second Violation in 24 months: $350 - $500, and Appearance REQUIRED
80-19(c)(1) up to 30 days' suspension.
            Third Violation in 36 months: Revocation.  
 
      (2)   Hail Exclusionary Zone. If a Driver solicits or picks up Passengers
in Manhattan south of East 96th Street and West 110th Street or at the New York
City Airports other than by prearrangement through a licensed Base of the class
that can dispatch the Driver's For-Hire Vehicle, or by dispatch of an
Accessible Vehicle, the Driver will be subject to the below enhanced
penalties. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: First Violation: $500.                  Appearance NOT
80-19(c)(2) Second Violation in 24 months: $750.          REQUIRED
            Third Violation in 120 months: Revocation.  
 
      (3)   No Requiring Ride-Sharing. A Driver of a For-Hire Vehicle must not
require that any prospective Passenger share a ride with another prospective
Passenger. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(c)(3)
 
   (d)   Taxi Stands and Relief Stands. 
      (1)   A Driver of a Taxicab has the right to take a position at any Taxi
Stand having a vacancy, and no other Driver may interfere with that right.
         (i)   A Driver of a Street Hail Livery has the right to take a
position at any Taxi Stand having a vacancy in the Hail Zone, and no other
Driver may interfere with that right. A Driver of a Street Hail Livery does NOT
have the right to take a position at a Taxi Stand in the Hail Exclusionary
Zone.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(d)(1)
 
      (2)   A For-Hire Driver must not pick up Passengers at any Taxi Stand.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: First Violation: $350.
80-19(d)(2) Second Violation in 24 months: $500.      Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            Third Violation in 36 months: Revocation.
 
      (3)   A Driver must not occupy a Taxi Stand in order to repair his or her
Vehicle, except for minor emergency repairs.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(d)(3)
 
      (4)   A Driver must take the rear position on the line formed at a Taxi
Stand (other than a relief stand) and must not overcrowd such stand.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-19(d)(4) hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (5)   A Driver must only occupy a Taxi Stand when on duty or for no
longer than one hour while on relief time or for Personal Use-Off Duty.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(d)(5)
 
      (6)   The Drivers of each of the first two Vehicles on a Taxi Stand,
(other than a relief stand), must remain in the driver's seat ready to accept
Passengers. Any other Driver on a Taxi Stand must be no more than 15 feet from
his or her Vehicle unless he or she is off duty.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(d)(6)
 
      (7)   A Driver may take any vacant position at a relief stand however
Drivers must comply with all posted restrictions including the type(s) of
Vehicles that may occupy a position at the relief stand and the maximum time a
Vehicle may park at the relief stand.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(d)(7)
 
   (e)   Taxicab Passenger Pick Up at Airports and Terminals. 
      (1)   The rules regarding Taxi Stands also apply to special Taxi Stands
and Feed Lines at air, rail, bus and ship terminals. (Note: These rules also
apply to Street Hail Liveries for terminals located in the Hail Zone).
      (2)   Where a terminal provides Taxicab or Street Hail Livery holding
areas:
         (i)   Drivers must park the Vehicle in a taxi holding area before
leaving on relief time.
         (ii)   Upon returning from relief time, the Driver must join the end
of the Feed Line.
         (iii)   Drivers are not permitted to bring Passengers into a holding
area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(e)(2)
 
      (3)   Where an airport Taxi Stand offers both Long Haul and Short Haul
lines, if there are Taxicabs available in both lines:
         (i)   A Driver who has been given a Short Haul ticket must not accept
a Passenger for a Long Haul.
         (ii)   A Driver who has been given a Long Haul ticket must not accept
a Passenger for a Short Haul.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(e)(3)
 
   (f)   For-Hire Vehicle Dispatch at Airports and Terminals. A Driver of a
For-Hire Vehicle must not accept a dispatch while parked or otherwise located
at Kennedy Airport or La Guardia Airport unless the Driver is parked in an area
other than the airport's designated passenger pick up locations. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-19(f)
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City
Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021;
amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 80-20 Operations – Refusing Passengers.
   (a)   Must Not Refuse to Transport Passengers. Unless the Driver has
justifiable grounds, the Driver must not refuse to transport in any of the
following circumstances: 
      (1)   Mandatory Transport. A Driver must not refuse by words, gestures or
any other means, to take a Passenger, including a person with a disability and
any service animal accompanying this individual, to any destination within the
City of New York, the counties of Westchester or Nassau, or Newark Airport. 
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-20(a)(1) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (2)   Attendant for Passengers with a Disability. A Driver must not
require a person with a disability to be accompanied by an attendant. 
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-20(a)(2) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (3)   Luggage and Mobility Aids. A Driver must not refuse to transport a
Passenger's luggage, wheelchair, crutches, other mobility aid or other
property. 
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-20(a)(3) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (4)   Ask Destination in Advance. A Driver must not attempt to learn the
destination of a Passenger before the Passenger is seated in the Taxicab or,
for a Hail Trip started in the Hail Zone, in the Street Hail Livery, except for
Flex Fare Trips. Attempting to learn the destination in advance is a violation
of this paragraph, regardless if the Driver ultimately agrees to transport the
Passenger. 
         (i)   Asking for a Passenger's destination in advance shall not be a
violation of this paragraph if the Driver is returning to his or her home or
garage and has followed the procedures provided in 35 RCNY §
80-19(a)(5) or 35 RCNY §
80-19(b)(6).
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-20(a)(4) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (5)   E-Hail Application. A Driver must not refuse to transport a
Passenger after accepting a Hail from that Passenger by means of an E-Hail
Application. 
 
35 RCNY §  Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
80-20(a)(5) 80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
      (6)   Accessible Dispatch Program and E-Hail Requests. 
         (i)   While operating an Accessible Vehicle, a Driver, after accepting
any E-Hail based on the metered rate of fare received through the Technology
System or from licensed E-Hail Application providers or from the Accessible
Taxi Dispatcher, must not refuse to transport a Passenger. 
         (ii)   A Driver who does not provide service after accepting an E-Hail
Request based on the metered rate of fare has refused to provide service and
will be subject to Mandatory Penalties for a refusal under subdivision (e) of
this section. 
         (iii)   A Driver must not operate an Accessible Vehicle unless the
Technology System is turned on. 
 
35 RCNY §
80-20(a)(6)(i) - Mandatory penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance NOT
(iii)            80-02(e).                                       REQUIRED
 
 
         (iv)   Assisting the Passenger. A Driver
            (A)   Must assist a passenger who uses a wheelchair or a passenger
with other disabilities when:
               (I)   Entering the vehicle from the sidewalk; and
               (II)   Exiting from the vehicle to the curbside.
            (B)   Must secure a passenger with a disability and their mobility
device within the Vehicle in a manner as specified in an approved TLC Education
Provider training course.
 
                Fine: $50 and suspension if plead
                guilty before a hearing; $150 if found
35 RCNY §      guilty following a hearing and
80-20(a)(6)(iv) suspension. The suspension is deferred  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               for 60 days if the Driver completes the
                Vision Zero and Accessibility Remedial
                course within the 60-day period, and
                the Driver will not be suspended.
 
         (v)   Packages. Upon a Passenger’s request, a Driver must place the
packages and parcels of a passenger with a disability in the Vehicle and secure
them and must retrieve them for the Passenger at the end of the trip.
 
               Fine: $50 and suspension if plead guilty
               before a hearing; $150 if found guilty
35 RCNY §     following a hearing and suspension. The
80-20(a)(6)(v) suspension is deferred for 60 days if    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
              the Driver completes the Vision Zero and
               Accessibility Remedial course within the
               60-day period, and the Driver will not
               be suspended.
 
         (vi)   Service Animal(s) and Companions. A Driver must accept and
provide transportation in the Accessible Taxicab for the Service Animal(s) of a
passenger with a disability and for as many companions as can be legally seated
in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §
80-20(a)(6) Fine: Mandatory Penalties as set forth in 35 RCNY §  Appearance
(vi)        80-02(e).                                             NOT REQUIRED
 
 
         (vii)   Assist with payment. Upon a Passenger’s request, the Driver
must assist the Passenger with completing payment, including but not limited to
helping the Passenger to access the credit card reader and counting cash aloud.

 
35 RCNY §
80-20(a)(6)(vii) Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
 
 
   (b)   Justifications for Refusing Passenger. The following are permitted
reasons for refusing to transport a Passenger: 
      (1)   Another Passenger is already seated in the Vehicle.
      (2)   The Driver has already acknowledged a Hail from another person, and
that other person is being picked up or is about to be picked up. (CAUTION: A
Driver must not acknowledge the Hail of one person over another in order to
avoid transporting the person whose Hail was not acknowledged.)
      (3)   The Passenger is carrying or is in possession of any article,
package, case or container which the Driver reasonably believes will cause
damage to the Vehicle. (CAUTION: This does NOT include wheelchairs, crutches, a
service animal or other mobility aid used by a Passenger with a disability.
Mobility aids must be accepted.)
      (4)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver is discharging his or her
last Passenger or Passengers prior to logging off from the Technology System.
      (5)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver is ending his or her work
shift, and has already logged off from the Technology System and locked both
rear doors.
      (6)   The Taxicab or Street Hail Livery Driver must take the Vehicle out
of service for required repairs and has already logged off from the Technology
System and locked both rear doors.
      (7)   The Passenger is accompanied by an animal that is not properly
secured in a suitable container. (CAUTION: This does not apply to service
animals accompanying people with disabilities.)
      (8)   The Passenger's destination is Newark Airport or someplace in
Nassau or Westchester County, and the Driver has been operating the Vehicle for
more than eight hours of any continuous 24-hour period.
      (9)   The Passenger is disorderly or intoxicated. (CAUTION: Drivers must
not refuse to provide service solely because of behavior caused by a person's
disability.)
      (10)   The Passenger is smoking and has refused the Driver's request to
stop. If the Driver has already begun the trip the Driver can discharge the
Passenger in a safe location. (CAUTION: The Driver must ask the Passenger at
least twice to stop smoking before requiring him or her to leave the Vehicle.)
      (11)   The Vehicle is a Street Hail Livery and the Passenger is in the
Hail Exclusionary Zone.
      (12)   The Vehicle is a For-Hire Vehicle and the Passengers is attempting
to Hail the Driver.
      (13)   The Vehicle is a Street Hail Livery and the Driver has accepted a
dispatch call for a Pre- Arranged Trip and is logged on but unavailable for
street-hail in the Technology System.
      (14)   The Vehicle is a For-Hire Vehicle and the Driver has accepted a
dispatch call for a Pre- Arranged Trip.
      (15)   The Vehicle is a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery and the Driver has
accepted a trip from the accessible dispatch program pursuant to 35 RCNY §  
53-08 or an Accessible E-Hail Request from an approved E-Hail App and is logged
on but unavailable for street-hail in the Technology System.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/15/2016,
eff. 1/14/2017; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023;
amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 4/2/2025,
eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 80-21 Operations – Drivers from Issuing Jurisdictions.
   (a)   Eligibility for Reciprocal Recognition. A driver holding a Valid
Issuing Jurisdiction driver's license (a IDL) will be eligible for Reciprocity,
provided that the driver meets all of the following requirements: 
      (1)   The driver is operating a vehicle that is licensed to operate for-
hire by an Issuing Jurisdiction (see 35 RCNY §
59A-05).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-21(a)(1)
 
      (2)   The driver holds a Valid Chauffeur's License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-21(a)(2)
 
      (3)   While operating within New York City, the Valid Chauffeur's License
must be displayed on request or be posted within the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-21(a)(3)
 
      (4)   The driver maintains and completes the Trip Record required and
described in subdivision (e), below.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-21(a)(4)
 
      (5)   A driver providing For-Hire transportation in New York City under
Reciprocal Recognition must comply with the Rules of this chapter while
operating within New York City as if the driver were licensed by the
Commission.
   (b)   Privileges of Reciprocal Recognition. A driver who meets the
requirements above for Reciprocity will be allowed, without any License issued
by or any fee paid to the Commission, to do the following: 
      (1)   Pick up Passengers in the driver's Issuing Jurisdiction for travel
to or through New York City.
      (2)   Pick up Passengers in New York City for travel to the driver's
Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (3)   When transporting Passengers between the jurisdictions (as
described in paragraphs (1) or (2) above), temporarily discharge and pick up
such Passengers within New York City; provided, however, that all the stops
must occur within 24 hours of the initial pick up of the Passengers.
      (4)   Transit through New York City for a trip beginning and ending
outside New York City.
   (c)   Prohibited Activity. A driver must NOT provide transportation for hire
between two points wholly within New York City unless both vehicle and driver
are licensed by the Commission. 
   (d)   Unlicensed Activity. A driver is engaged in Unlicensed Activity if he
or she: 
      (1)   Fails to have the licenses required or is not eligible for
Reciprocity under subdivision (a) of this section.
      (2)   Engages in the prohibited activity described in subdivision (c) of
this section.
   (e)   Issuing Jurisdiction Trip Record. 
      (1)   A record of each trip between New York City and an Issuing
Jurisdiction must be made prior to the commencement of the trip and recorded on
a Trip Record carried in the vehicle.
      (2)   The Trip Record must be kept for a period of no less than one year
after the trip.
      (3)   The record of each trip must include the following information:
         (i)   The Passenger's name or other identifier.
         (ii)   The time of scheduled pick-up.
         (iii)   The location where the Passenger is scheduled to be picked up.
         (iv)   The location of any intermediate stops between the original
pick-up location and the final destination.
         (v)   The Passenger's final destination.
         (vi)   At the completion of the trip, the time of completion shall be
added to the record.
      (4)   The Trip Record must be kept in the vehicle during any trip between
New York City and an Issuing Jurisdiction, including a trip through either New
York City or an Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (5)   The Trip Record must be presented for inspection on request to any
police officer or peace officer acting pursuant to his or her special duties or
other person authorized by the Commission or by the Issuing Jurisdiction.
      (6)   Failure to present a properly maintained Trip Record when requested
by an authorized person will be presumptive evidence of Unlicensed Activity.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-22 Vehicles – Operation and Condition.
   (a)   3-Minute Idle. Drivers must comply with the New York City Air
Pollution Control Code, including the provision that the Driver must not cause
or permit the engine of the Vehicle to idle for longer than three minutes. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(a)
 
   (b)   Inspection by Driver of Vehicle Condition. A Driver must not operate a
Vehicle without continuing personal inspection and reasonable determination
that all equipment, including brakes, tires, lights, an Approved Tablet,
signals and passenger seatbelts and shoulder belts, is in good working order. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(b)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (c)   Clean Interior. During his or her work shift, a Driver must keep the
Vehicle's interior clean. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(c)
 
   (d)   Required Exterior Identification Clean and Visible. During his or her
work shift, a Driver must keep all exterior markings required by the Commission
clean and unobstructed so that they can be seen at all times. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(d)
 
   (e)   No Unauthorized Equipment in Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries. A
Driver must not operate a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery that uses or has
installed any equipment or mechanical or electronic devices not specifically
listed in these rules, unless authorized in writing by the Commission. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-22(e)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Use of Electronic Devices in Taxicabs. A Driver may use no more than
one electronic device with an E-Hail Application, separate from the Driver
Information Monitor supplied as part of the Technology System and/or a device
provided for the Accessible Dispatch Program. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-22(f)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (g)   Use of Electronic Devices in Street Hail Liveries. In addition to the
Technology System and/or a device provided for the Accessible Dispatch Program,
a Street Hail Livery is permitted to have: 
      (1)   the dispatch equipment required by its Street Hail Livery Base; and
      (2)   one electronic device that is used to accept E-Hails from a
licensed E-Hail Application and/or dispatches from a Base, provided that the
device is mounted in a fixed position and not hand-held and use of the
electronic device is limited to either voice or one-touch preprogrammed buttons
or keys while the Vehicle is in motion.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-22(g)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (h)   Use of Electronic Devices in For-Hire Vehicles. In addition to the
dispatch equipment required by a Driver's Base, a For-Hire Vehicle Driver is
permitted to use the following electronic device(s) provided that the device(s)
is mounted in a fixed position and not hand-held and use of the electronic
device(s) is limited to either voice or one-touch preprogrammed buttons or keys
while the Vehicle is in motion: 
      (1)   If the dispatch equipment required by a Driver's Base is capable of
accepting dispatches from other Bases, ONE electronic device that is used to
accept dispatches from a Baser.
      (2)   If the dispatch equipment required by a Driver's Base is not
capable of accepting dispatches from other Bases, TWO electronic devices that
are used to accept dispatches from a Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-22(h)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (i)   No Unauthorized Signage. A Driver must not place any signs in a
Taxicab or a Street Hail Livery not specifically listed in these rules, unless
authorized in writing by the Commission. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(i)
 
   (j)   IVCS. A Driver must not delete, modify, or alter in any way image, or
video footage of the IVCS.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-22(j)    day suspension.  
 
   (k)   Use of Approved Tablets in For-Hire Vehicles. A For-Hire Vehicle
Driver is permitted one Approved Tablet per For-Hire Vehicle, pursuant to 35
RCNY §
59E-22(i). The tablet must be mounted in a fixed position and not hand-held.
 
            Fine: First violation: $250 if plead guilty
            before a hearing; $350 if found guilty
35 RCNY §  following a hearing. Second and subsequent  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-22(k)    violations: $350 if plead guilty before a
            hearing; $450 if found guilty following a
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City
Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023; amended City Record 2/4/2025, eff. 3/6/2025)
§ 80-23 Vehicles – Required Items in Taxicabs and Street Hail Liveries.
   (a)   A Driver must not operate a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery unless the
Vehicle is equipped or provided with the following:
      (1)   The Technology System (or a written Trip Record, when required and
permitted).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
80-23(a)(1) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   The Driver's TLC Driver License (or Paratransit License if the
Vehicle is an Accessible Street Hail Livery being operated by a Paratransit
Driver) displayed in the appropriate license frame).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-23(a)(2) hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (3)   The Rate Card assigned to the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery
displayed in the Rate Card frame.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-23(a)(3)
 
      (4)   A New York City five (5) borough indexed street map or geographic
position system device.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-23(a)(4) $50 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Clear View for Passengers. 
      (1)   A Driver must not block a Passenger's view of the Taximeter, his or
her TLC Driver License, or the Rate Card and must not block in any way a
Passenger's access to the medallion number or Street Hail Livery License number
on the Raised Lettering Plaque and the Identification Braille Plaque.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-23(b)(1) hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   A Driver must not operate a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery after
sunset unless the face of the Taximeter, his or her TLC Driver License, and the
Rate Card are illuminated so that they are clearly visible from the rear seat
by a Passenger with normal vision.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-23(b)(2)
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 80-24 Vehicles – Required Items in For-Hire Vehicles.
   (a)   Licenses and Certificates. A Driver must not operate a For-Hire
Vehicle without the following: 
      (1)   On the right visor, on top of the right side of the dashboard or in
the glove compartment:
         (i)   The certificate of registration or a legible copy of it; and
         (ii)   The insurance card or a legible copy of it.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
80-24(a)(1) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   The Driver's TLC Driver License displayed in a protective holder
attached to the back of the driver's seat in the Vehicle.
         (i)   Exception for Black Cars and Luxury Limousines. Black Cars and
Luxury Limousines will not be required to have the protective holder mounted to
the back of the driver's seat as required in this paragraph. However, the
Driver's TLC Driver License must be displayed in the Vehicle in a way so as to
be clearly visible from the Passenger seat and available for inspection by the
Passenger upon request.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
80-24(a)(2) hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (b)   Trip Record. If the For-Hire Vehicle is used for providing pre-
arranged transportation for hire between the City of New York and an Issuing
Jurisdiction, a Trip Record, as described in 35 RCNY §
80-25(f)(3), must be carried in the Vehicle. 
   (c)   Clear View for Passengers. A Driver must not block a Passenger's view
of his or her TLC Driver License and, in a Livery, the Livery Passengers' bill
of rights. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-24(c)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 80-25 Vehicles – Technology System Operation.
   (a)   A Driver is required to log in and operate the Technology System for
each trip in a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery, including those Taxicab or Street
Hail Livery trips that begin with the use of an E-Hail Application but
otherwise excluding Street Hail Livery trips that are Pre-Arranged Trips,
except for Flex Fare Trips.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and/or minimum 5 day to maximum 30 Appearance REQUIRED
80-25(a)    day suspension.
 
   (b)   Log Off Procedures for a Taxicab and Street Hail Livery. 
      (1)   A Driver must log off from the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-25(b)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (c)   Unavailable Procedures for a Taxicab and Street Hail Livery. Upon
accepting an Accessible E-Hail Request or a trip from the Dispatch Program
pursuant to 35 RCNY § 
53-08 or a Licensed E-Hail Application or a Pre-Arranged Trip, a Driver must be
logged on but unavailable for street hail in the Technology System. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-25(c)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (d)   If necessary, the Driver will transmit any corrections electronically,
using the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-25(d)
 
   (e)   Technology System(s) Malfunction. In the event the Technology System
malfunctions or fails to operate, the Driver must fix the Technology System
before accepting any new trips to transport passengers.
      (1)   When correcting a written Trip Record, a Driver:
         (i)   Must not erase any entry or make it completely unreadable.
         (ii)   Must correct a wrong entry only by drawing a single line
through the incorrect entry and recording the date, time and reason for the
change.
         (iii)   Must not leave blank lines between entries on any written Trip
Record.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-25(e)(1)
 
      (2)   A Driver must not rewrite a written Trip Record either in whole or
in part, unless authorized by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-25(e)(2)
 
   (f)   Unauthorized Devices or Repairs. 
      (1)   A Driver must not connect any unauthorized device to the Technology
System.
      (2)   The Driver must not tamper with, repair or attempt to repair the
Technology System seals, cable connections or electrical wiring,
      (3)   The Driver must not make any change in the Taxicab's or Street Hail
Livery's mechanism or its tires which would affect the operation of the
Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-25(f)    $150 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City
Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024; amended City Record 4/2/2025, eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 80-26 Vehicle – Taxicab and Street Hail Livery Taximeters and Roof Lights.
   (a)   Taximeter Condition. 
      (1)   Defective Condition. A Driver must not pick up or transport a
Passenger in a Taxi or Street Hail Livery when the Taximeter in his or her
Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is defective. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing;
80-26(a)(1) $150 if found guilty following a hearing.    Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 1
 
      (2)   Defect(s) that Arise During Shift. If the Taximeter breaks down
during a trip so that the fare can no longer be monitored, the Driver must
immediately tell the Passenger and offer him or her the option of: 
         (i)   Continuing the trip after mutually agreeing to a reasonable
fare, or
         (ii)   Terminating the trip and paying the fare shown on the Taximeter
to that point.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-26(a)(2) $150 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
      (3)   Procedures for Terminating Use of Vehicle with Defective Taximeter.
Upon terminating a trip because of a defective Taximeter the Driver must: 
         (i)   Log off from the Technology System
         (ii)   Lock the rear doors
         (iii)   Transmit data that the Taximeter is defective (or enter on a
written Trip Record, if the Technology System is inoperative)
         (iv)   Return the Vehicle immediately to the garage or base of record
or a licensed Taximeter repair shop.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
80-26(a)(3) $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
      (4)   A Driver must immediately notify the Taxicab Owner of any Taximeter
defect.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance REQUIRED
80-26(a)(4)
 
      (5)   Seals and Serial Number. A Driver must not drive a Taxicab or
Street Hail Livery unless all Taximeter seals and cable housing seals are in
good condition, pressed by the Commission or its authorized designee and show
no signs of tampering. The serial number of the Taximeter must be the same as
that shown on the rate card assigned to the Vehicle. 
         (i)   The Commission will assume that a Driver who operates a Vehicle
with a broken Taximeter seal knew of the tampering or alteration and
deliberately operated the Vehicle in violation of this Rule, and will take
appropriate action against the Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(a)(5)
 
      (6)   Receipt Paper. A Driver must not pick up or transport a Passenger
unless the Taximeter is properly equipped with paper for printing receipts. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Taximeter Operation. 
      (1)   Setting Taximeter to Record. As soon as a Passenger enters the
Taxicab or the Street Hail Livery on a Hail Trip, the Driver must immediately
place the Taximeter in the recording or "Hired" position and must keep it in
that position until arrival at the destination. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(1) Points: 1
 
      (2)   Entering Passenger with a Disability. If the Passenger is a Person
with a Disability, the Driver must not place the Taximeter in the recording or
"Hired" position while the Driver is assisting a person with a disability to
enter the Vehicle or while assisting with that Passenger's mobility aid. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(2) Points: 1
 
      (3)   Exiting Passenger with a Disability. If the Passenger is an
individual with a disability who requires assistance to exit the Vehicle, the
Driver must place the Taximeter in a non-recording position before assisting
such Passenger and must leave the Taximeter in a non-recording position until
such Passenger has paid the fare and safely exited the Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(3)
 
      (4)   Flat Fare Trip. When the Taxicab or Street Hail Livery is engaged
in a flat fare trip between Kennedy Airport and Manhattan, the Driver must key
the information into the Technology System, as applicable (or enter on a
written Trip Record) that this is a flat fare trip to or from Kennedy Airport
and include the time and distance of the trip. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(4)
 
      (5)   End of Trip. Upon reaching the Passenger's destination, the Driver
must place the Taximeter in a non-recording or "Time Off" position, inform the
Passenger of the fare due and leave the Taximeter in a non- recording position
until the fare is paid. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(5)
 
      (6)   Re-setting the Taximeter. Immediately after the Passenger leaves
the Vehicle, the Driver must clear the Taximeter, placing it in an off or
"Vacant" position in which it must remain until the next Passenger enters the
Vehicle. 
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
80-26(b)(6)
 
   (c)   Unauthorized Taximeter Devices or Repairs. 
      (1)   A Driver must not connect any unauthorized device to the Taximeter.
      (2)   The Driver must not tamper with, repair or attempt to repair the
Taximeter seals, cable connections or electrical wiring,
      (3)   The Driver must not make any change in the Vehicle's mechanism or
its tires which would affect the operation of the Taximeter system.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30
80-26(c)(1)-(3) days.                                       Appearance REQUIRED
                Points: 3
 
      (4)   It will be an affirmative defense to a violation of this provision,
35 RCNY §
80-26(c), that the Driver:
         (i)   Did not know of or participate in the alleged Taximeter
tampering, and
         (ii)   Exercised due diligence to ensure that Taximeter tampering did
not occur.
   (d)   Report Signs of Tampering to TLC. A Driver must notify the Owner (or,
in the case of a Street Hail Livery, the Street Hail Livery Base) and the
Commission by telephone immediately, and in writing within 24 hours, upon the
discovery of any of the following: 
      (1)   A Taximeter other than the Taximeter approved by the Commission and
indicated on the Rate Card, has been installed in the Vehicle operated by the
Driver.
      (2)   A Taximeter seal in the Vehicle operated by the Driver has been
removed or tampered with.
      (3)   An unauthorized device that may affect the operation of a Taximeter
has been connected to the Taximeter, seal, cable connection or electrical
wiring of the Vehicle operated by the Driver.
      (4)   Any intervening connections, splices, "Y" connections or direct or
indirect interruptions or connections of any kind whatsoever have been
discovered on any wiring harness attached to the Taximeter in the Vehicle
operated by the Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
80-26(d)
 
   (e)   Roof Light Condition. 
      (1)   The Roof Light must be illuminated when the Taximeter is not in use
and the Driver is on duty and available; and
      (2)   The Roof Light must be off when any of the following occurs:
         (i)   The Taximeter is in use.
         (ii)   The Driver has logged off or logged on but is unavailable for
street-hail in the Technology System.
         (iii)   The Driver is a Street Hail Livery Driver traveling to pick up
a Passenger for a Pre-Arranged Trip.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 if plead guilty before a
80-26(e)    hearing; $150 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Unauthorized Roof Light Devices or Repairs.
      (1)   A Driver must not tamper with the Roof Light or any of the interior
lights or connections except to replace a defective bulb or fuse.
      (2)   The Roof Light of a Taxicab or Street Hail Livery must be
automatically controlled only by the movement of the Taximeter button or
ignition switch.
      (3)   The Commission will assume that a Driver who operates a Vehicle
with an unauthorized installation or device controlling interior or roof
lighting knew of the unauthorized installation or device and deliberately
operated the Vehicle in violation of this Rule, and the Commission will take
appropriate action against the Driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30
80-26(f)    days.                                       Appearance REQUIRED
            Points: 3
 
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 80-27 Persistent Violator Program.
   (a)   Program for Persistent Violators of Drivers' Rules. 
      (1)   Suspension and Revocation – Points and Time Periods. 
         (i)   Suspension. Any Driver whose License has not been revoked and
who has within a 15-month period accumulated a total of at least six but fewer
than ten TLC Points or DMV Points or both combined, counting from the date of
conviction, will have such Driver's TLC Driver License suspended for up to 30
days.
         (ii)   Revocation. The Commission will revoke the TLC Driver License
of any Driver who has within a 15-month period accumulated a total of 10 or
more TLC Points or DMV Points or both combined, counting from the date of
conviction.
      (2)   Multiple Violations from a Single Incident. For a Driver who has
been found guilty of multiple violations arising from a single incident, the
Commission will consider the Driver guilty of the single violation with the
highest point total for purposes of this section.
      (3)   More Severe Penalties at Discretion of Commission. The Commission
can impose penalties that are more severe than or additional to those stated in
this section.
      (4)   Hearing Process and Imposition of Penalties. 
         (i)   The Commission will impose penalties described in this section
following the hearing at which the Driver is found to have violated the rule(s)
triggering these penalties.
         (ii)   Persistent violator penalties will be in addition to those
penalties specifically listed in the Rules.
      (5)   Point Reduction for Voluntary Course Completion. 
         (i)   Before suspending or revoking a Driver's License, the Commission
will deduct three TLC Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who
voluntarily attends and satisfactorily completes a Point Reduction Course or
three DMV Points from the points accumulated by any Licensee who voluntarily
attends and satisfactorily completes a Defensive Driving Course. Such point
reduction will count only towards points accumulated by the Licensee as a
result of the conviction for violations that occurred within 15 months prior to
the date of the completion of the course, counting from the date of conviction.
         (ii)   In order for the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction
Course to reduce the Driver's Persistent Violator Program points, the course
must be satisfactorily completed prior to the adjudication of the Persistent
Violator summons. Completion of the Defensive Driving Course or Point Reduction
Course after the adjudication of a Persistent Violator Program summons will
reduce the Driver's Persistent Violator Program points only after the Driver
completes such Driver's suspension. If the Driver's License was issued by a
state other than New York, the Driver must submit a recent driving abstract
from the state of licensure. The Driver must furnish the Commission with proof
of when the course was taken and that the course was satisfactorily completed.
         (iii)   If the Commission has already suspended or revoked the
Driver's License, the point reduction will not change the Commission's
decision.
         (iv)   The Commission will not reduce the TLC Points of any Driver
more than once in any five year period and will not reduce the DMV Points of
any Driver more than once in any 18-month period.
         (v)   If no Point Reduction Course is available when the Driver seeks
to enroll, the Driver may take a Defensive Driving Course. After the Driver
furnishes the Commission with proof that the course was satisfactorily
completed, the TLC will deduct three points from the number of points accrued
under the Persistent Violator Program whether such points are TLC Points or DMV
Points.
(Added City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 12/9/2020,
eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
Chapter 82: Street Hail Livery Service
**** Subchapter A: [Untitled] ****
§ 82-01 Subchapter A: Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the procedures and requirements for obtaining a Street
Hail Livery License
   (b)   To establish the rules and regulations for operating a Street Hail
Livery
   (c)   To establish the penalties for violating the Rules
§ 82-02 Penalties.
   (a)   Unlicensed Activity.
      (1)   Unlicensed Activity is the act of providing or advertising the
provision of any Commission-regulated for hire transportation service by:
         (i)   Any Licensee whose License is suspended, revoked, or expired and
not yet renewed, or
         (ii)   Any person who does not hold a Valid License or Authorization
from the Commission as a for hire driver, for the for hire vehicle, or for the
for hire service, as applicable.
      (2)   Unlicensed Activity specifically includes the activities listed in
§ 19-506 and § 19-528 of the Administrative Code, and can subject the violator
to the seizure and possible forfeiture of the vehicle involved.
   (b)   Specific Penalties. If there are specific penalties for violating a
Rule, they are shown at the end of the Rule. The penalty section also states
whether the violator must attend the Hearing.
   (c)   Payment of Fines.
      (1)   Fines are due not later than 30 days after the Respondent is found
guilty of or pleads guilty to the violation, unless:
         (i)   the Respondent files an appeal of the decision issued by the
Taxi and Limousine Tribunal within the time required by 48 RCNY
Chapter 5 of the Rules of the City of New York, in which case the payment of
the fines will be deferred until 30 days after the date of the appeal decision.
      (2)   If the fine is not paid by the close of business on the date due,
the Commission will notify the Respondent in writing that the Respondent's
License will be suspended in 10 business days of the date of the notification
until the fine is paid, unless the Respondent demonstrates to the Commission,
in person or in writing, that the fine has been paid.
   (d)   Suspension and Revocation.
      (1)   If a penalty in this Chapter specifies suspension or revocation,
the suspension or revocation includes both the Street Hail Livery License plus
the Vehicle's For-Hire or Paratransit Vehicle License.
      (2)   If a For-Hire or Paratransit Vehicle License for a vehicle used as
a Street Hail Livery is suspended or revoked as a result of the imposition of a
penalty under another Chapter of these Rules, the suspension or revocation is
also applicable to the Street Hail Livery License.
§ 82-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter.
   (a)   Applicant in this chapter means the individual or Business Entity
applying for an original or renewal Street Hail Livery License under this
Chapter in whose name the License applied for will be issued.
   (b)   Business Entity in this Chapter includes corporations, partnerships
and limited liability companies.
   (c)   Driver in this Chapter means a Driver of a Street Hail Livery who is
authorized to by these rules to drive a Street Hail Livery. A Driver can be a
Driver possessing a TLC Driver License or a Paratransit Driver who is driving
an Accessible Street Hail Livery.
   (d)   Flat Rate is a definite dollar amount that will be charged to a Street
Hail Livery passenger for a specific trip, and is fixed before the trip begins
(NOTE: "double the Taximeter" is not a Flat Rate).
   (e)   Legatee means a person to whom any proceeds of an estate of a deceased
person are to be distributed.
   (f)   License in this Chapter means a Street Hail Livery License.
   (g)   Licensee in this Chapter means the holder of a Street Hail Livery
License.
   (h)   MTA Tax is the 50 cent tax on taxicab and certain Street Hail Livery
trips imposed by Article 29-A of the NYS Tax Law.
   (i)   Rooftop Advertising Fixture means a device that incorporates the
functions of a Roof Light with an advertising display.
   (j)   Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider means the entity responsible for
supplying the Rooftop Advertising Fixture to the Street Hail Livery Licensee
and maintaining the advertising material.
   (k)   Technology System shall have the same meaning given such term in 35
RCNY §
51-03.
   (l)   Technology System Provider shall have the same meaning given such term
in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (m)   A Transferee is an Applicant who is seeking approval from or has been
approved by the Chairperson to own and operate a Street Hail Livery License in
which the Applicant is acquiring an interest, either directly or indirectly,
through a transfer described under 35 RCNY §
82-44.
   (n)   A Transferor is the Owner of an interest in a Street Hail Livery
License being transferred.
   (o)   Trip Data shall have the same meaning given such term in 35 RCNY §
51-03.
   (p)   Vehicle in this Chapter shall mean the Commission-licensed Vehicle in
use with a Street Hail Livery License.
   (q)   Wheelchair Passenger is a passenger using a wheelchair.
(Amended City Record 12/10/2015, eff. 1/9/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-04 Licensing – General Requirements.
   (a)   Identification. An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a
Business Entity applying for a Street Hail Livery License must provide to the
Commission:
      (1)   A Valid Government-issued photo ID and
      (2)   A Valid Social Security number.
   (b)   Age. An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
applying for a Street Hail Livery License or its renewal must be at least 18
years of age.
   (c)   Good Moral Character.
      (1)   An individual or all Business Entity Persons of a Business Entity
applying for a Street Hail Livery License must be fingerprinted and must be of
good moral character. Fingerprinting for the purpose of investigating good
moral character is also required of the following, unless waived by the
Chairperson in his or her discretion:
         (i)   Any new Business Entity Persons added by a Licensee.
      (2)   Applicant's criminal history will be considered in a manner
consistent with the Correction Law of the State of New York.
   (d)   Fit to Hold a License. An individual or Business Entity must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission that the Applicant is Fit to
Hold a Street Hail Livery License.
   (e)   Drivers Designated as Agents to Accept Service.
      (1)   The Applicant must designate each and every Driver who operates the
Applicant's Street Hail Livery as an agent to accept service of Commission
notices to correct defects in the Street Hail Livery.
      (2)   Delivery of a notice of defect to a Driver will be adequate service
of notice to the Licensee.
   (f)   Liability Insurance. The Applicant must have liability insurance
coverage by bond or policy as required by the State of New York and these
Rules. See 35 RCNY §
82-14.
   (g)   Payment of Fines and Fees.
      (1)   An Applicant, including an applicant for a renewal License, must
pay, and provide proof of payment of any outstanding fines or fees owed by the
Applicant to:
         (i)   the Commission,
         (ii)   NYC Department of Finance's Parking Violations Bureau,
         (iii)   NYC Department of Finance's Red Light Camera Unit,
         (iv)   NYS DMV's Traffic Violations Bureau and
         (v)   any of their successor agencies.
      (2)   This requirement includes, but is not limited to, payment of fines
and fees owed as of the date of the application by:
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant is a Business Entity
Person, and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant is also a Business Entity Person.
      (3)   An Applicant, including an Applicant for a renewal License, must
pay any fines related to the Applicant's failure to surrender a previously
revoked License (of any type), unless the Applicant can demonstrate in person
or in writing that the License has been surrendered.
   (h)   Address. An Applicant must give the Commission the Applicant's current
Mailing Address and Email Address.
   (i)   Affiliation with only one Base. A Street Hail Livery License and the
Vehicle with which the License is used can affiliate with only one Base at a
time and that Base must be a Validly licensed Street Hail Livery Base.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 82-05 Licensing – Issuance of Street Hail Livery Licenses.
   (a)   Application for License. An Applicant for a Street Hail Livery License
must file an application on the form specified by the Commission and provide
all documentation required.
   (b)   Applicants must meet requirements of Licensure. Street Hail Livery
Licenses will be issued only to Applicants who meet all requirements for
Licensure contained in this Chapter, including the requirements for Licensure
specified in subdivision (c) of this Section for the period of time specified
in that subdivision.
   (c)   [Repealed.]
   (d)   [Repealed.]
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 82-06 Licensing – Special Requirements.
   (a)   Only One Street Hail Livery License.
      (1)   No person or Business Entity may own or have an interest in more
than one Street Hail Livery License.
      (2)   Exception: A Person or Business Entity may own or have an interest
in up to five Street Hail Livery Licenses restricted to accessible vehicles. No
Licensee whose License is restricted to accessible vehicles may own or have an
interest in more than five total Street Hail Livery Licenses and each of those
must be an Accessible Street Hail Livery License. A Person or Business Entity
which owns or has an interest in one or more Accessible Street Hail Livery
License may not also have an interest in a Street Hail Livery License that is
NOT an Accessible Street Hail Livery License.
      (3)   No person or Business Entity that currently owns or has an interest
in a Valid or suspended Street Hail Livery License may apply for another Street
Hail Livery License, except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2).
      (4)   For purposes of this Rule, a person or Business Entity has an
interest in a Street Hail Livery License if the person or Business Entity has
an ownership or financial interest, but not including an interest pledged as
security, in a Street Hail Livery License, or if the person or Business Entity
has a fiduciary relationship with, an ownership interest in, or is otherwise a
member of any other entity, including but not limited to a corporation,
partnership, joint venture or association, that owns a Street Hail Livery
License.
      (5)   To determine if a Street Hail Livery License will be attributed to
the Applicant or Licensee, the Commission will include any Street Hail Livery
License held by any of the following:
         (i)   any Business Entity Persons of the Applicant or Licensee;
         (ii)   any Business Entity of which the Applicant or Licensee is a
Business Entity Person; and
         (iii)   any Business Entity of which a Business Entity Person of
Applicant or Licensee is also a Business Entity Person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Revocation Appearance REQUIRED
82-06(a)
 
   (b)   Licensing – Vehicle Requirements.
      (1)   Except as provided in paragraph (2) below, a Street Hail Livery
License may only be used with a For-Hire Vehicle licensed by the Commission
under Chapter 59A that meets all of the requirements set forth in Subchapter B
of this Rule (Street Hail Livery Hack-Up).
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery License that is restricted to use with an
accessible vehicle may be used with a For-Hire Vehicle licensed by the
Commission under Chapter 59A or with a Paratransit Vehicle licensed by the
Commission under Chapter 60, provided that the vehicle meets all of the
requirements for accessible vehicles set forth in Subchapter B of this Rule
(Street Hail Livery Hack-Up), including 35 RCNY §
82-50 (Standard Specifications for Accessible Street Hail Liveries).
      (3)   A Street Hail Livery License must be placed into service with a
For-Hire Vehicle within 90 days of issuance. Exception: A Street Hail Livery
License that is restricted to use with an accessible vehicle must be placed
into service with a For-Hire Vehicle or a Paratransit Vehicle within 180 days
of issuance. The Chairperson can extend the date by which a vehicle must be
placed in service for any Licensee for good cause shown.
   (c)   Licensing – Special Requirements for Business Entities.
      (1)   Partnerships. If the Applicant is a partnership, it must file with
its application a certified copy of the partnership certificate from the clerk
of the county where the partnership's principal place of business is located.
      (2)   Corporations.
         (i)   If the Applicant is a corporation it must file the following
with its Street Hail Livery License application:
            A.   A certified copy of its certificate of incorporation and a
certified copy of the filing receipt;
            B.   A list of officers and shareholders; and
            C.   A certified copy of the minutes of the meeting at which the
current officers were elected.
         (ii)   No corporate or trade name will be accepted by the Commission
that is similar to a name already in use by another Licensee.
         (iii)   All corporate officers and shareholders are subject to the
same standards and criteria as individual Licensees.
         (iv)   The Commission will only recognize corporate officers that have
been approved by the Commission; this means that the Commission will not accept
transactions pertaining to the License from persons not approved as officers.
         (v)   It is a violation of these Rules for a corporate Licensee to
appoint a new officer without the approval of the Commission.
         (vi)   Temporary approval contingent on final approval can be
permitted in cases where an officer has resigned or died and another individual
must be able to continue the regular daily operation of the Licensee
corporation.
         (vii)   The standards and criteria for holding a Street Hail Livery
License are equally applicable when the shares of a corporate Licensee are held
by another Business Entity.
      (3)   Limited Liability Companies (LLCs).
         (i)   If the Applicant is a limited liability company it must file the
following with its Street Hail Livery License application:
            A.   A copy of its articles of organization;
            B.   A copy of its operating agreement; and
            C.   A list of the members, with the percentages of the Applicant
owned by each.
         (ii)   No LLC or trade name will be accepted by the Commission that is
similar to a name already in use by another Licensee.
         (iii)   All members of the Street Hail Livery License Applicant are
subject to the same standards and criteria as individual Licensees.
         (iv)   The Commission will only recognize members that have been
approved by the Commission; this means that the Commission will not accept
transactions pertaining to the License from persons not approved as members.
         (v)   It is a violation of these Rules for a Licensee that is an LLC
to add a new member without the approval of the Commission.
         (vi)   The standards and criteria for holding a Street Hail Livery
License are equally applicable when membership interests in a LLC Owner are
held by another Business Entity.
   (d)   Licensing – Special Requirements Accessible Street Hail Liveries. Any
Street Hail Livery License required to be used with an Accessible Street Hail
Livery may only be used with a Commission-licensed Accessible Street Hail
Livery and must continue to be used with an Accessible Street Hail Livery
vehicle while the license is Valid. Any such License cannot be used with a
vehicle that is NOT an Accessible Street Hail Livery.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance; Appearance REQUIRED
82-06(d)    revocation may be ordered
 
§ 82-07 Licensing – Term of License.
   (a)   New License. The term of a new Street Hail Livery License is three
years.
   (b)   Renewal License. The term of a renewal License is three years.
   (c)   When to File for Renewal.
      (1)   The right to renewal is automatic, upon payment of the renewal fee,
provided that the Licensee is in good standing.
      (2)   A renewing Applicant must file a completed application at least 30
days before the expiration date of the License. The review of applications
submitted fewer than 30 days before the expiration date will not be completed
until after the expiration date of the License. Licenses are not Valid after
the License expiration date until the application for renewal is approved by
the Commission.
      (3)   A renewing Applicant can file a completed application up to 60 days
after the expiration date as a "late application", if the Applicant pays a late
fee of $25. When submitting a late application, the License will remain expired
and not Valid until the application for renewal is approved by the Commission.
The late fee will be assessed in addition to any penalties that may be
specified for a violation of this Rule.
      (4)   Application Submission Date. 
         (i)   Applications filed online: The date of submission is the date an
application is filed online.
         (ii)   Applications filed in person: The date of submission is the
date an application is filed in person.
      (5)   A License cannot be renewed more than 60 days after the expiration
date.
      (6)   It is the Licensee's responsibility to obtain a renewal application
in order to comply with the filing deadline.
   (d)   Suspended Licenses.
      (1)   If a License is suspended, the Licensee must apply for renewal as
required in subdivision (c) above in order to renew the License. Failure to
complete the renewal requirements will subject the Licensee to the penalties
provided for in subdivision (c).
      (2)   A License that is suspended is not Valid and cannot be used until
the suspension ends, even if the Applicant has filed an application for a
renewal.
   (e)   Advertising Licenses. A license to display exterior advertising runs
for one year or less and each license will expire on the 31st day of August.
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 82-08 Licensing – Fees.
   (a)   Street Hail Livery License Fee.
      (1)   The Street Hail Livery License fee is:
         (i)   $1,500 in the Initial Street Hail Livery License Issuance
Period,
         (ii)   $3,000 in the Second Street Hail Livery License Issuance
Period, and
         (iii)   $4,500 in the Third Street Hail Livery License Issuance
Period.
         (iv)   Exception for Accessible Street Hail Liveries. During the
Initial Street Hail Livery License Issuance Period, there will be no fee for a
Street Hail Livery License required to be used with an accessible vehicle,
however the vehicle licensee will have to pay a fee to license the vehicle as
either a For-Hire Vehicle or a Paratransit Vehicle.
      (2)   The Street Hail Livery License will be valid for a three year term,
prior to renewal.
      (3)   The Street Hail Livery License fee must be paid with the
application.
   (b)   Renewal Fee. The renewal fee for a Street Hail Livery License will be
$900 tri-annually.
   (c)   Late Filing Fee. The Commission will charge an additional fee of $25
for a late filing of a renewal application.
   (d)   When Fee is Paid. The fee for an original or renewal Street Hail
Livery License must be paid at the time the application is filed.
   (e)   Vehicle License Replacement Fee. The Commission will charge a fee of
$25 for each replacement Street Hail Livery License or Decal.
   (f)   License Plate Replacement Fee. The Commission's fee for replacement of
license plates issued by the New York State Department of Motor Vehicles will
be $25 per vehicle.
   (g)   Inspection Fee. The Commission's fee for a required Street Hail Livery
Safety and Emissions inspection is $90; this fee includes the certificate of
inspection issued when the Street Hail Livery passes the inspection. Inspection
fees must be prepaid with each application and renewal application. Note:
Paratransit Vehicles licensed as Accessible Street Hail Liveries will be
subject only to a visual inspection to assure that they are accessible and that
the accessibility features are operating, and a meter test.
   (h)   Reinspection Fee. There is a reinspection fee only if reinspection is
required because the Street Hail Livery failed the component of the inspection
required by Section 301 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law. In that
case, the reinspection fee is thirty five dollars ($35). If reinspection is
required because the Street Hail Livery failed any other component of the
inspection, there is no reinspection fee.
   (i)   Advertising Permit Fee. The fee for a Street Hail Livery Licensee to
display exterior advertising is $10 annually. If a license is surrendered in
less than 6 months, one half of the fee will be refunded.
   (j)   Vehicle Transfer Fees.
      (1)   A Licensee can change the Street Hail Livery Vehicle's affiliation
from one Base to a different Base after approval by the Chairperson and payment
of a $25 fee.
      (2)   A Licensee can transfer a Street Hail Livery License from one
vehicle to another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (3)   A Licensee can replace the license plates on a Street Hail Livery
after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (4)   A Licensee can transfer the license plates from one vehicle to
another after approval by the Chairperson and payment of a $25 fee.
      (5)   A Licensee must pay a separate fee for each separate transfer. This
is true even if the Licensee wants to do several types of vehicle transfer all
at one time.
   (k)   License Transfer Fee. An Applicant who is seeking to acquire a Street
Hail Livery License, or an interest in a Street Hail Livery License, from a
current Licensee must pay a processing fee of $25.
   (l)   No Refund if Application Denied. The Commission will not refund the
fees in subdivisions (b) through (k) of this section if it denies or
disapproves the application. The Commission will not refund any fee if an
applicant for a license fails to complete the application or fails to fulfill
the requirements for licensure.
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 6/15/2017,
eff. 7/15/2017)
§ 82-09 Licensing – Causes for Denial.
   (a)   Failure to Meet Requirements. The Commission can deny the application
for a License or its renewal of any Applicant who fails to meet the
requirements of these rules. The Commission will inform the Applicant, in
writing, of the specific reason(s) for this denial.
   (b)   Material Misrepresentation or Falsification. The Commission will deny
an application for a License or its renewal, or can impose other sanctions
(such as taking action against other licenses held by the applicant), if any of
the following occurs:
      (1)   The Applicant makes a material misrepresentation in the
application.
      (2)   The Applicant fails to inform the Commission of a material change
in the information contained in the application.
      (3)   The Applicant attempts to conceal the identity of a party having an
interest in the ownership of a Street Hail Livery.
   (c)   No Longer Meets Requirements. The Commission will deny an application
for a License or its renewal and can revoke or suspend any License if the
Commission becomes aware of information that the Licensee no longer meets the
requirements for a Street Hail Livery License.
   (d)   Violation of the Rules. The Commission will deny an application for a
License if, within the past two years, the Applicant (or any Business Entity
Person of a Business Entity Applicant) has engaged in any of the following:
      (1)   Assault of a passenger, official or member of the public in any way
relating to a Street Hail Livery or other TLC-licensed Vehicle;
      (2)   Any instance of bribery or unlawful gratuity, or attempted bribery
or offer of unlawful gratuity, toward a city employee;
      (3)   Providing the Commission with false information;
      (4)   Two or more unlawful passenger service refusals;
      (5)   Two or more incidents of overcharging, as a Driver;
      (6)   Three failures to respond to an official communication from the
Commission;
      (7)   Three or more vehicle safety violations for a particular Street
Hail Livery or other Commission-licensed Vehicle;
      (8)   Operating a Street Hail Livery License designated for an Accessible
Street Hail Livery with a vehicle that is not an Accessible Street Hail Livery;
      (9)   Whether as an individual or as a Business Entity Person of a
Business Entity, has:
         (i)   Ten or more outstanding unexcused failures to appear at
scheduled Commission hearings, or
         (ii)   Ten or more unsatisfied Commission fines or fines that remained
unsatisfied until renewal.
   (e)   Failure to Complete Application Requirements.
      (1)   The Chairperson will deny an application for a new License if the
Applicant has not completed all the requirements of an application within 45
days of the date the application is filed.
      (2)   The Chairperson will not deny an application under this Rule if (a)
completion is delayed because the Chairperson has not issued a final decision
in any matter related to the Street Hail Livery License application pending
before the Chairperson, and (b) the Applicant has complied with any requests
made by the Chairperson.
   (f)   Non-Use. A Street Hail Livery License will be revoked for non-use if:
      (1)   For 30 or more days, the Licensee fails to maintain a Base
affiliation (as required by 35 RCNY §
82-12(g)).
      (2)   For 60 or more days, the Licensee fails to maintain insurance
coverage (as required by 35 RCNY §
82-14).
      (3)   For 60 or more days, the License holder fails to comply with the
inspection requirements (as required by 35 RCNY §
82-30).
   (g)   Prior Revocation.
      (1)   If an Applicant has had a previous Street Hail Livery License or
other Commission-issued Vehicle License revoked, the Chairperson may deny the
Applicant's application if the previous revocation shows that the applicant is
not Fit to Hold a License.
      (2)   To determine if a previously revoked Street Hail Livery License
("Revoked License") will be attributed to this Applicant, the Commission will
include any Revoked License held by any of the following:
         (i)   All of Applicant's Business Entity Persons, and
         (ii)   Any other entity in which any of Applicant's Business Entity
Persons also serve as a partner, officer or shareholder.
   (h)   Additional Consideration of an Application. If a review of the
application leads the Chairperson to believe that the Applicant may not be Fit
to Hold a License, the Chairperson may seek additional information from the
Applicant. This request for additional information may be an in-person
interview, telephone call, letter, e-mail, or other method of communication.
This additional consideration may result in the denial of the application.
Failure to provide any requested information within the time frame requested,
or failure to appear at a scheduled interview will result in denial of the
application.
§ 82-10 Licensing – Transfer of Vehicle License to a New Vehicle.
   (a)   Transfer of Vehicle License to a New Vehicle.
      (1)   In order to transfer the Street Hail Livery License to a new
vehicle, the Licensee must file an application to transfer the License.
      (2)   No transfer application will be approved until the Licensee
presents the vehicle for inspection by the Commission. (See 35 RCNY §
82-30)
   (b)   Only One License per Vehicle. There can only be one Valid Street Hail
Livery License issued for any one Vehicle, as determined by the VIN.
§ 82-11 Licensing – Care of Licenses.
   (a)   Unauthorized Entries. No unauthorized entry can be made on the Street
Hail Livery License or the Decal(s). No entry on the Street Hail Livery License
or Decal(s) can be changed or defaced.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 for first violation
82-11(a)    $500 for second violation in 24 months      Appearance REQUIRED
            Revocation for third violation in 36 months
 
   (b)   Do Not Alter Rate Card. A Licensee must not change, mark, cross out or
make any unauthorized entries on a Street Hail Livery's Rate Card, or display a
Rate Card that contains wrong information.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-11(b)    $100 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (c)   Replace Damaged License or Rate Card. A Licensee must immediately
surrender an unreadable or damaged Street Hail Livery License, Decal, or Rate
Card to the Commission for replacement.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-11(c)
 
   (d)   Replace Lost or Stolen License or Rate Card. A Licensee must
immediately report a lost or stolen License or Rate Card to the Commission for
replacement.
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission and the Police Department of
the theft, loss or destruction of any License or Rate Card within 48 hours (not
including weekends and holidays) of the loss.
      (2)   The Licensee must also provide any affidavit or information the
Commission requires, including the police receipt number.
      (3)   A substitute License and Rate Card will be issued by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-11(d)(1)-(2)
 
   (e)   Report Finding Lost License or Rate Card.
      (1)   A Licensee must notify the Commission and the Police Department
within 24 hours (not including weekends and holidays) after locating any
License or Rate Card that was reported as stolen or lost.
      (2)   The Licensee must provide any affidavit or information the
Commission requires in connection with that event.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 for the first violation; $350 -
82-11(e)    $500 for the second or subsequent violation Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            (s) within 36 months.
 
   (f)   Surrender License and Rate Card. A Licensee must surrender the
Licensee's Street Hail Livery License, Decal and Rate Card to the Commission:
      (1)   Within 48 hours of notice that the Street Hail Livery License has
been suspended or revoked or has expired (and has not been renewed), or that
the Licensee's renewal application has been denied;
      (2)   Prior to the sale of Licensee's Street Hail Livery Vehicle; or
      (3)   Prior to removal of Licensee's Street Hail Livery from service for
a period of 30 or more consecutive days.
      (4)   The Licensee must surrender the T&LC license plates to the New York
State Department of Motor Vehicles upon surrender of the License and Rate Card.
      (5)   Upon surrender, revocation or non-renewal of a Street Hail Livery
License, the last For-Hire Vehicle affiliated with the Street Hail Livery
License, if owned by the Street Hail Livery licensee, must be presented to the
Commission's inspection facility to confirm removal of the license decal, the
Technology System and taximeter within ten days from the date of the surrender,
revocation or non-renewal of the Street Hail Livery License. NOTE: A vehicle
which will continue in use with another TLC-issued license (such as a For-Hire
Vehicle License) will also be inspected to make sure the Technology System and
taximeter have been removed and the vehicle repainted.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance REQUIRED
82-11(f)    $300 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (g)   Report Replaced New York License Plates. A Licensee must report to the
Commission the replacement of any lost or stolen New York State license plates
within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) after getting the new
plates.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-11(g)
 
(Amended City Record 12/10/2015, eff. 1/9/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-12 Compliance with Law – No Unlicensed Activity.
   (a)   No Unlicensed Street Hail Liveries. A Licensee must ensure that when
the Licensee's Street Hail Livery is in operation for hire it is in use with a
Vehicle which has a Valid License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
82-12(a)
 
   (b)   Street Hail Livery License and Commission License Plate.
      1.   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must not allow a Vehicle to be
dispatched unless:
         (i)   A Vehicle has NYS license plates embossed with the legend "T &
LC"
 
35 RCNY §     Vehicle Fine: $350 and suspension until
82-12(b)(1)(i) compliance                              Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               Penalty Points: 1
 
         (ii)   The Licensee's Street Hail Livery License is Valid.
 
                Vehicle Fine: $1,500 for the first
35 RCNY §      offense; $2,000 for the second and
82-12(b)(1)(ii) subsequent offenses within a 36-month Appearance NOT REQUIRED
                period.
                Penalty Points: 1
 
      2.   It will be a defense to a charge of operating a Street Hail Livery
without a proper License if the Vehicle is listed by the Commission on its Web
Site as Valid to operate as a Street Hail Livery.
   (c)   No Advertising as "Taxi" if Unlicensed. A Licensee who does not have a
Valid Street Hail Livery License must not hold himself or herself out to the
public providing hail service, or as a "taxi," "Street Hail Livery," "Taxicab"
or "hack" service.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,500 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
82-12(c)
 
   (d)   No Unregistered Vehicles.
      (1)   A Licensee must ensure that the Licensee's Street Hail Livery is
operated only while the NYS registration of the vehicle remains Valid.
      (2)   Operating a vehicle without a Valid registration will be considered
the same as operating without a Valid Street Hail Livery License.
      (3)   The Street Hail Livery License of a Licensee who operates a Street
Hail Livery without valid state registration will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-12(d)    days; Suspension until compliance
 
   (e)   No Unlicensed Drivers.
      (1)   No Street Hail Livery may be operated for hire unless the Driver
has in his or her possession a Valid Driver's License that authorizes the
Driver to operate a Street Hail Livery.
 
            Fine: $1,500 for the first offense; $2,000 for
35 RCNY §  the second and subsequent offenses within a 36- Appearance REQUIRED
82-12(e)(1) month period.
            Penalty Points: 1
 
      (2)   It will be a defense to a charge that a Driver is not authorized to
operate a Street Hail Livery if the Driver is listed by the Commission on its
Web Site as authorized to operate a Street Hail Livery.
      (3)   Driver Must Have Valid Chauffer's License.
         (i)   A Driver must not operate a Street Hail Livery without a Valid
Chauffeur's License.
         (ii)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee is responsible for knowing the
status of the state-issued driver's license for any Driver using a Vehicle with
a Street Hail Livery License.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-12(e)(3) Penalty Points: 1
 
   (f)   Validity of License Requires Valid State Registration.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery License will be Valid only while the NYS
registration of the Vehicle remains Valid.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must immediately surrender the Street
Hail Livery License to the Commission upon the expiration, restriction,
suspension, or revocation of the Vehicle's NYS registration.
      (3)   The Street Hail Livery License of a Licensee who operates a Street
Hail Livery without valid state registration will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $400 and Suspension until compliance. Appearance REQUIRED
82-12(f)
 
   (g)   Affiliation with Licensed Base. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must not
operate or allow another person to operate the Licensee's Street Hail Livery
unless:
      (1)   It is affiliated with a Validly Licensed Street Hail Livery Base at
all times
      (2)   The Street Hail Livery is being dispatched from its affiliated
Base, unless the Street Hail Livery is being dispatched for a Pre-Arranged Trip
and the Base dispatching the Street Hail Livery informs the customer that the
Street Hail Livery is from another Base.
 
            Fine: $100 per day for each day
35 RCNY §  unaffiliated beginning 7 days AFTER the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-12(g)    vehicle first becomes unaffiliated and
            suspension
 
   (h)   Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must
comply with all requirements of
35 RCNY Chapter 59A concerning payment of Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax.
§ 82-13 Compliance with Law – No Street Hail Livery Service Inside Hail
Exclusionary Zone.
   (a)   Street Hail Livery Operation.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must ensure that the Driver of the
Street Hail Livery accepts passengers by hail from the street only in the Hail
Zone and does not accept a Pre-Arranged Trip beginning in the Pre-Arranged
Exclusionary Zone. Paratransit service by a licensed Paratransit vehicle will
not be considered a Pre-Arranged Trip for the purposes of this section. Service
provided to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority for transportation of
persons with disabilities will not be considered a Pre-Arranged Trip for the
purposes of this section.
      (2)   A finding that a Driver of a Street Hail Livery accepted a
passenger by hail in the Hail Exclusionary Zone or accepted a Pre-Arranged Trip
in the Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone will be evidence that a Street Hail
Livery Licensee failed to make a good faith effort to deter the commission of
that violation. The Chairperson can seize a Street Hail Livery if there is
probable cause to believe that the driver of such vehicle is seeking a
passenger for a Hail Trip in the Hail Exclusionary Zone or a Pre-Arranged trip
in the Prearranged Exclusionary Zone.
 
                Fine: $500 for the first violation and
                suspension;
35 RCNY §      $750 for the second violation in 24 months Appearance REQUIRED
82-13(a)(1)-(2) and suspension for up to 30 days;
                Revocation for third violation in 120
                months
 
      (3)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must ensure that the Driver of the
Street Hail Livery does not accept a Pre-Arranged Trip beginning in the Pre-
Arranged Exclusionary Zone; a Driver can accept a Pre-Arranged Trip beginning
at one of the New York City Airports. Paratransit service by a licensed
Paratransit vehicle will not be considered a Pre-Arranged Trip for the purposes
of this section. Service provided to the Metropolitan Transportation Authority
for transportation of persons with disabilities will not be considered a Pre-
Arranged Trip for purposes of this section.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
82-13(a)(3)
 
      (4)   Except as provided in this Rule, a Validly Licensed Street Hail
Livery with a Validly Licensed Driver may provide transportation by pre-
arrangement through its affiliated Street Hail Livery Base throughout New York
City, except for trips beginning in the Pre-Arranged Exclusionary Zone.
      (5)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee will be liable for the penalties
provided for in this Chapter for any violation of this section.
      (6)   This rule does not prohibit a Driver of a Street Hail Livery from
traveling though the Exclusionary Zone in order to complete a trip by hail that
began outside of the Exclusionary Zone, it does not prohibit a Driver of a
Street Hail Livery from traveling through the Exclusionary Zone to complete a
Pre-Arranged Trip that began outside of the Exclusionary Zone and it does not
prevent the Driver of a Street Hail Livery from driving through the
Exclusionary Zone where that Driver is not driving for-hire.
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016)
§ 82-14 Compliance with Law – Insurance Coverage.
   (a)   Maintain Insurance Coverage.
      (1)   Street Hail Livery Licensees must ensure that the Street Hail
Livery is covered by liability insurance in the form of a bond or an insurance
policy that fully complies with the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and
the New York State Insurance Law.
      (2)   Licensees must maintain all other forms of insurance required by
law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(a)    days
 
   (b)   Submit Proof of Insurance. Every year in which a Licensee files an
application to renew the License of one or more Street Hail Liveries, the
Licensee must, at that time, provide the Commission with the name and address
of the Licensee's insurance carrier and the policy number for the Licensee's
Street Hail Livery, along with proof of coverage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(b)
 
   (c)   Notification of Changes in Insurance Coverage. A Licensee must notify
the Commission in writing within 7 business days of any of the following:
      (1)   Receipt of notice that Licensee's required liability insurance has
been cancelled;
      (2)   A change of insurance carrier;
      (3)   A change in the policy number of Licensee's liability insurance.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-14(c)
 
   (d)   Coverage Requirements.
      (1)   General Coverage. All Street Hail Livery Licensees must maintain
liability coverage for the Street Hail Livery through an insurance policy or a
bond in amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of § 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $100,000 minimum liability and not less than $300,000 maximum
liability for bodily injury or death, as these terms are described and defined
in § 370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-14(d)(1)
 
      (2)   Coverage for Vehicles with Seating Capacity of Nine to Fifteen.
Each Street Hail Livery Licensee with a seating capacity of at least 9 but not
more than 15 Passengers must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in
amounts not less than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of § 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $1,500,000 minimum liability for bodily injury or death, as
those terms are described and defined in § 370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(d)(2)
 
      (3)   Coverage for Vehicles with Seating Capacity of Sixteen or More.
Each Street Hail Livery Licensee with a seating capacity of at least 16
Passengers must maintain coverage for each Vehicle owned in amounts not less
than the following:
         (i)   $100,000 per person, payable for those expenses specified in
paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of subdivision a of § 5102 of the New York State
Insurance Law;
         (ii)   $5,000,000 minimum liability for bodily injury or death, as
those terms are described and defined in § 370(1) of the Vehicle and Traffic
Law.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(d)(3)
 
   (e)   Report of Collisions. 
      (1)   Report to Insurance Carrier. Any Collision involving a Street Hail
Livery that is required by the insurance policy to be reported to the insurance
carrier must be immediately reported to the carrier by the Licensee, in
writing.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,000 Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(e)(1)
 
      (2)   Report to Commission.
         (i)   A Licensee must immediately report to the Commission in writing
all Collisions that are required to be reported to the Department of Motor
Vehicles (as required by § 605 of the Vehicle and Traffic Law) that involve the
Licensee's Street Hail Livery.
         (ii)   A Licensee must also provide to the Commission a copy of any
legally required report filed with the NYS Department of Motor Vehicles, within
10 days of the date the report is due to be filed with the Department of Motor
Vehicles.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 and $25 for each day of violation Appearance REQUIRED
82-14(e)(2) thereafter and suspension until compliance
 
   (f)   Surrender Rate Card and License upon Termination of Insurance. A
Licensee must either:
      (1)   Surrender the Street Hail Livery's Rate Card, License and Decal(s)
to the Commission on or before the termination date of the vehicle's insurance,
or
      (2)   Submit proof of new insurance effective on the date of termination
of the old policy.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-14(f)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 9/25/2025,
eff. 3/1/2026)
§ 82-15 Compliance with Law – Workers' Compensation.
   (a)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must comply with the NYS Workers
Compensation Law.
§ 82-16 Compliance with Law – Personal Conduct.
   (a)   Bribery.
      (1)   Actual Bribery Attempt. A Licensee must not bribe or attempt to
bribe or offer any gratuity whatsoever to any employee, representative or
member of the Commission in return for favorable or preferential treatment.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Up to $10,000 per Street Hail Livery
82-16(a)(1) implicated in the violation plus mandatory Appearance REQUIRED
            divestiture of Street Hail Livery License.
 
      (2)   Appearance of Bribery. An Applicant or Licensee must not offer or
give any gift or gratuity or any other thing of value to any employee,
representative or member of the Commission, or any public servant or dispatcher
employed at a public transportation facility.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 plus revocation Appearance: N/A
82-16(a)(2)
 
      (3)   Failure to Report Bribery. A Licensee must immediately report to
the Commission and the NYC Department of Investigation any request or demand
for a gift, gratuity or thing of value by any employee, representative or
member of the Commission or any other public servant or dispatcher employed at
a public transportation facility.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 days or Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(a)(3) revocation.
 
      (4)   Offer of Gift to Airport or Transportation Terminal Staff. A
Licensee must not offer or give any gift, gratuity, or thing of value to a
person or persons employed at any airport or other transportation terminal to
provide ground transportation information services, dispatching service,
security services, traffic and parking control, or baggage handling, whether or
not the person or persons are employed by the Port Authority of New York and
New Jersey, LIRR, Metro-North, or any similar entity.
 
35 RCNY §  Licensee Fine: $250 – 1,00Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(a)(4)
 
      (5)   Failure to Remove Cash. When the Street Hail Livery is in
Licensee's possession, Licensee must remove all currency from a Street Hail
Livery's interior prior to its inspection by any Commission personnel.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-16(a)(5)
 
   (b)   Fraud, Theft. While performing the duties and responsibilities of a
Licensee, the Licensee must not commit or attempt to commit, alone or in
concert with another, any act of fraud, misrepresentation or theft.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(b)    days or revocation
 
   (c)   Willful Acts of Omission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, the Licensee must not deliberately fail to
perform, alone or with another, any act where this failure is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and/or Suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(c)    days or revocation.
 
   (d)   Willful Acts of Commission. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, the Licensee must not deliberately perform or
attempt to perform, alone or with another, any act that is against the best
interests of the public, although not specifically mentioned in these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 - $350 and Suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(d)    or revocation.
 
   (e)   Threats, Harassment, Abuse. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, the Licensee must not threaten, harass or abuse
any person.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(e)    days or revocation
 
   (f)   Use or Threat of Physical Force. While performing the duties and
responsibilities of a Licensee, the Licensee must not use any physical force
against any person except in self defense.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(f)    days or revocation
 
   (g)   Threat or Harm to Service Animal. A Licensee must not distract, harm
or use physical force against or attempt to distract, harm or use physical
force against a Service Animal accompanying a person with a disability.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 - $1,500 and/or suspension up to 60 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(g)    days or revocation
 
   (h)   Reporting of Criminal Conviction.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must immediately notify the
Commission of any criminal conviction of the Licensee, individually or, if the
Licensee is a Business Entity, of any Business Entity Person.
      (2)   The notice must be in writing and must be accompanied by a
certified copy of the certificate of disposition issued by the clerk of the
court explaining what happened as a result of the conviction.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $250 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(h)
 
         (i)   Cooperate with Law Enforcement. A Licensee must cooperate with
all law enforcement officers, authorized representatives of the Commission and
the NYC Department of Investigation. Cooperation includes, but is not limited
to, responding to a request for Licensee's name, License number, Rate Cards,
Trip Records, and any other documents required to be maintained by the Street
Hail Livery Licensee.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 - $350 Appearance REQUIRED
82-16(i)
 
   (j)   Cooperate with the Commission.
      (1)   A Licensee must promptly answer all questions and comply with all
communications, directives and summonses from the Commission or its
representatives and the NYC Department of Investigation or its representatives.
This means a Licensee must comply within the period specified in the
communication.
      (2)   Within five business days following a request from the Commission,
the Licensee must produce any Licenses or other documents the Licensee is
required to have.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $300 and Suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-16 (j)(1)-(2)
 
      (3)   A Licensee must respond to any contact from the Commission within
48 hours, seven days a week.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-16(j)(3)
 
   (k)   Courtesy. A Licensee must be courteous to Passengers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-16(k)
 
   (l)   Retaliation. 
      (1)   An Owner of a Street Hail Livery License must not retaliate against
any Driver or Vehicle owner for making a good faith complaint against any
Street Hail Livery License Owner.
      (2)   Retaliation will be broadly construed, and will include imposing
any adverse condition or consequence on the Driver or Vehicle owner or
withholding or withdrawing any beneficial condition or consequence from the
Driver or Vehicle owner.
 
            Fine: $1,000 plus restitution to the driver
35 RCNY §  or vehicle owner for losses for the first
82-16(l)    violation and a fine of $10,000 plus        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            restitution to the driver or vehicle owner
            for the second violation within five years.
 
(Amended City Record 9/24/2015, eff. 10/24/2015; amended City Record 12/11/
2018, eff. 1/10/2019; amended City Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended
City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023)
§ 82-17 Compliance with Law – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Compliance with Commission Rules and Regulations, Generally. The
Licensee must comply with the Commission's Street Hail Livery specifications,
the Marking Specifications for Street Hail Liveries, all pertinent provisions
of the Administrative Code and other laws, rules or regulations governing
Street Hail Livery Licensees.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
82-17(a)    hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (b)   Alcohol and Drug Laws. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must not
knowingly allow a Street Hail Livery to be operated by a Driver who is under
the influence of any drugs or alcohol or whose driving ability is in any way
impaired.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $10,000 and revocation Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(b)
 
   (c)   Payment of all Fines and Judgments. The holder of a Street Hail Livery
License issued under this Chapter must satisfy any outstanding judgment and pay
any civil penalty owed for a violation relating to traffic in a Qualified
Jurisdiction or for a violation of the regulations of a Qualified Jurisdiction.

 
35 RCNY §  Penalty: Suspension until satisfaction or Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-17(c)    payment
 
   (d)   No False Statements.
      (1)   A Licensee must not file with the Commission any statement required
under the Special Requirements for Business Entities provision, 35 RCNY §
82-06(c), that the Licensee knows or should know to be false, misleading,
deceptive or materially incomplete.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Up to $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(d)(1)
 
   (e)   No Unlawful Purpose.
      (1)   A Licensee must not use or permit any other person to use
Licensee's Street Hail Livery, base or office of record for any unlawful
purpose.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(e)(1) days or revocation
 
      (2)   A Licensee must not conceal any evidence of a crime connected with
Licensee's Street Hail Livery, base or office of record.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(e)(2) days or revocation
 
      (3)   A Licensee must report immediately to the police any attempt to use
Licensee's Street Hail Livery to commit a crime or to escape from the scene of
a crime.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 - $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(e)(3) days
 
   (f)   No False Credentials.
      (1)   A Licensee must not attempt to avoid inspection of a Licensed
vehicle by using false credentials to disguise one vehicle as another or by any
other means contrary to law or regulation of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Up to $10,000 per Street Hail Livery
82-17(f)(1) implicated in the violation, plus mandatory Appearance REQUIRED
            divestiture of Street Hail Livery License
 
      (2)   A Licensee must not operate or present for inspection a vehicle in
which the Vehicle Identification Number has been loosened and reattached, or
switched from another vehicle or otherwise altered in a manner not in
compliance with Article 17 of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law.
 
            Fine: Mandatory divestiture of Street Hail
35 RCNY §  Livery License, plus a fine of up to $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(f)(2) per Street Hail Livery implicated in the
            violation
 
      (3)   A Licensee must not present documents to the Commission that
falsely indicate compliance with liability insurance and/or Workers'
Compensation insurance requirements.
 
            Fine: Mandatory divestiture of Street Hail
35 RCNY §  Livery License, plus a fine of up to $10,000 Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(f)(3) per Street Hail Livery implicated in the
            violation
 
   (g)   Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund (TSP Responsibility). 
      (1)   A Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider is
responsible for remitting all collected Street Hail Livery Improvement
Surcharge amounts to the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund, as described in
subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
66-25.
      (2)   For trips provided in WAV vehicles, the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Driver Incentive Payment (as specified in 35 RCNY §
82-70(b)) will be paid directly to the Driver by the Technology System Provider
and/or E-Hail Application Provider at the time and in the manner required by
the Commission.
      (3)   When any Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge amount due is not
collected by the Technology System Provider and/or E-Hail Application Provider,
the Street Hail Livery Licensee must pay the entire such amount, as remitted by
the Street Hail Livery Driver, to the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund.
      (4)   The Street Hail Livery Licensee, or the Technology System Provider
and/or E-Hail Application used by the Street Hail Livery Licensee, must pay the
Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail Livery Improvement
Fund at the time and in the manner required by the Commission.
      (5)   If a Street Hail Livery Licensee, or the Technology System Provider
and/or E-Hail Application used by the Street Hail Livery Licensee, does not pay
the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge to the Street Hail Livery
Improvement Fund at the time required, nonpayment will be grounds for the
suspension of the TLC license issued to the entity required to pay and/or by
the denial of any renewal application or of any application for another TLC-
issued license submitted by such entity, in addition to monetary penalties for
such non-payment.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $1,000 and suspension until Appearance REQUIRED
82-17(g)(1)-(5) compliance
 
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 5/10/2023, eff. 6/9/2023; amended City
Record 6/20/2024, eff. 7/20/2024)
§ 82-18 Operations – Management Oversight.
   (a)   Direct Licensee Operations. The Commission will hold the Licensee
accountable for operation of the Street Hail Livery.
   (b)   Indirect Licensee Operations.
      (1)   The use of an employee or a Base will not relieve the Licensee of
any obligation under these rules.
   (c)   Special Requirements for Licensee's Use of Affiliated Street Hail
Livery Base.
      (1)   Affiliation With More Than One Base Prohibited. A Licensee may not
affiliate with or use more than one Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-18(c)(1)
 
      (2)   Provisions of this Section Cannot be Waived by Contract.
         (i)   No contract or other agreement between a Street Hail Livery
Licensee and a Base may include a provision intended to supersede or impair the
effectiveness, in whole or in part, of the provisions of this Chapter.
         (ii)   No provision in a contract or other agreement between a
Licensee and a Base that attempts to impair the effectiveness of this section
will be enforceable.
§ 82-19 Operations – Service Requirements (Customers).
   (a)   No Required Ride-Sharing. A Street Hail Livery Licensee may not
require that any prospective Passenger share a ride with another prospective
Passenger.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-19(a)
 
§ 82-20 Operations – Responsibilities with Respect to Drivers. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; repealed City Record 2/2/2023,
eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 82-21 Leasing a Street Hail Livery License or Street Hail Livery.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-22 Records – Trip Record Information.
   (a)   Trip Record.
      (1)   Trip Data must be collected and stored electronically, through the
use of the Technology System. (Note: Nothing in this Chapter alters or replaces
the trip data requirements imposed on Paratransit Vehicles under 35 RCNY
Chapter 60 when a Paratransit Vehicle is providing Paratransit service under
those Rules) 
      (2)   If the Technology System is inoperable, a written Trip Record must
be kept during the 48-hour period the Street Hail Livery is permitted to
operate after timely notification of the malfunction. (See 35 RCNY §
82-42) 
      (3)   A written Trip Record, if required, must be kept for eighteen
months.
   (b)   Written Trip Records. A written Trip Record must include the following
information:
      (1)   The Street Hail Livery License number
      (2)   The Street Hail Livery Driver's License number
      (3)   The location where each passenger is picked up
      (4)   The time each passenger is picked up
      (5)   The total number of passengers
      (6)   The location where each passenger is dropped off
      (7)   The time each passenger is dropped off
      (8)   The total trip mileage
      (9)   The itemized metered fare for the trip (fare, tolls, surcharge, and
tip, if paid by credit or debit card)
      (10)   Method of payment
      (11)   The trip number
      (12)   Whether the trip is a Hail Trip or a Pre-Arranged Trip
      (13)   Other information required by the Commission
      (14)   For a Pre-Arranged Trip, the following information is required:
         (i)   The time of dispatch.
         (ii)   If the dispatch was for a Pre-Arranged Trip to begin with an
airport pickup.
   (c)   Access to Trip Record.
      (1)   Trip Record information must be available to the Commission in a
form and format and delivery method as specified by the Commission if received
by the Licensee, and to the Affiliated Base, and the Street Hail Livery Driver.
      (2)   Trip Record information must be available at the end of each shift
and/or contract term.
      (3)   A Licensee must take possession of any written Trip Records weekly
if available.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-22(c)(3)
 
   (d)   Changes and Corrections.
      (1)   A Licensee must not knowingly enter false information into the
electronic data system for entry onto the electronic Trip Record.
      (2)   A Licensee must not make erasures or obliterate information on a
written Trip Record, or other record that Licensee is required to maintain.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-22(d)(2)
 
      (3)   [Reserved.]
      (4)   Except as provided in paragraph three of this subdivision, Trip
Records may not be changed either in whole or in part, unless authorized by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance NOT
82-22(d)(4) days                                           REQUIRED
 
   (e)   Drive For-Hire Prohibition. 
      (1)   The holder of a Street Hail Livery vehicle license must not allow
the Street Hail Livery vehicle to be driven for hire if the driver is not
logged into the Technology System. If the Technology System is inoperable, a
written Trip Record must be kept during the 48-hour period that the Street Hail
Livery is permitted to operate after timely notification of the malfunction.
(See 35 RCNY §
82-42)
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023)
§ 82-23 Records – Contact Information.
   (a)   Mailing Addresses.
      (1)   Each Licensee must designate a Mailing Address. This can be the
address of the Affiliated Base but cannot be a post office box number.
      (2)   Each Licensee must also designate an Email Address and must have a
working Email Address at all times.
      (3)   Any communication from the Commission is sufficient if sent to the
Mailing Address furnished by the Licensee.
      (4)   Any communication from the Commission, except notices and summonses
for which the manner of service is specified in 35 RCNY §
68-05, is sufficient if sent by email to the last Email Address provided by the
Licensee.
      (5)   Each individual Licensee must also file and maintain with the
Commission the Licensee's personal address and a telephone number where the
Licensee can be reached directly.
      (6)   Each Business Entity Licensee must also file and maintain with the
Commission the personal addresses and telephone numbers of each of the
Licensee's Business Entity Persons.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-23(a)(1) -(6)
 
      (7)   The Commission is not required to send any communication to the
Licensee's personal address, except when notifying Licensee that the License of
the Affiliated Base has been revoked. Other communications sent to the
Licensee's personal address are at the discretion of the Commission.
      (8)   A Licensee must report any change of Mailing Address or Email
Address to the Commission in person or by registered or certified mail within
ten days.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-23(a)(8)
 
   (b)   Telephone Number and Immediate Access. A Licensee must maintain on
file with the Commission a current telephone number connected to an answering
machine or recording device, a pager number, an answering service telephone
number, a voice mailbox, or a similar means of telephone contact, and an Email
Address so that the Commission can reach the Licensee on a 24-hour basis.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-23(b)
 
§ 82-24 Records – Maintenance Requirements.
   (a)   All Licensees must maintain the following additional records for a
period of three years: (1) Drivers' electronic and written trip records;
      (2)   Receipts and disbursements from the Street Hail Livery operations;
      (3)   Payments to Drivers;
      (4)   Mileage records of each vehicle;
      (5)   Workers' compensation insurance coverage, if any;
      (6)   Liability insurance coverage;
      (7)   Any other information required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $50 for violation of each Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-24(b)(1)-(7) paragraph hereof.
 
   (c)   A Licensee must make available to a Driver any records that the
Licensee is required to maintain, and any records the Driver may be required to
present to the Commission or any other governmental agency. The Licensee may
provide photocopies of such records to the driver.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-24(c)
 
§ 82-25 Reporting Requirements.
   (a)   Report Change in Status.
      (1)   When a Licensee has a change of Mailing Address, Email Address, or
a change in the office of record, the Licensee must report the changes in
person or by mail within 10 days of such change (not including weekends and
holidays).
      (2)   The Licensee must bring the Rate Card for the Licensee's Street
Hail Livery.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-25(a)
 
   (b)   Lost, Stolen, or Damaged Taximeter. If a Taximeter is lost, stolen or
damaged beyond repair, the Licensee must notify the Commission and the Police
Department within 48 hours (not including weekends and holidays) of the loss,
theft or destruction, and must provide any affidavit or information that the
Commission requires.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-25(b)
 
§ 82-26 Operations – Rates and Tolls.
   (a)   Metered Rate of Fare When Accepting Passengers by Hail.
      (1)   Metered Rate of Fare. The rate of fare for Street Hail Liveries for
Passengers in Hail Trips is as follows, regardless of the number of passengers
or stops:
         (i)   The charge for the initial unit is $3.00 plus, on and after
January 1, 2015, the Street Hail Livery Improvement Surcharge of $1.00.
         (ii)   The charge for each additional unit is $.70.
         (iii)   The unit of fare is:
            A.   One-fifth of a mile, when the Street Hail Livery is traveling
at 12 miles an hour or more; or
            B.   60 seconds, when the Street Hail Livery is traveling at less
than 12 miles an hour.
         (iv)   The Taximeter must combine fractional measures of distance and
time in accruing a unit of fare. Any combination of distance or time specified
in paragraph (iii) above must be computed by the Taximeter in accordance with
Handbook 44 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
         (v)   The fare must include pre-assessment of the unit currently being
accrued; the amount due can therefore include a full unit charge for a final,
fractional unit.
      (2)   Surcharges. In addition to the metered rate of fare, Street Hail
Liveries will add the following surcharges for Hail Trips, except where
surcharges are specifically exempted:
         (i)   A rush hour surcharge of $2.50 for all trips beginning on a
weekday after 4:00 p.m. and before 8:00 p.m.; this surcharge will not be
applied on legal holidays.
         (ii)   A nighttime surcharge of $1.00 for all trips beginning after 8:
00 p.m. and before 6:00 a.m.
         (iii)   A surcharge of $5.00 for all trips to LaGuardia Airport.
      (3)   MTA Tax. The MTA Tax must be charged on any Hail Trip that starts
in New York City and ends in any of the following:
         (i)   New York City;
         (ii)   Dutchess County;
         (iii)   Nassau County;
         (iv)   Orange County;
         (v)   Putnam County;
         (vi)   Rockland County;
         (vii)   Suffolk County;
         (viii)   Westchester County.
   (b)   Flat Rates to Kennedy Airport.
      (1)   Flat Fare Rate from Manhattan. The fare for a Hail Trip to Kennedy
Airport from a location in Manhattan which is in the Hail Zone will be a Flat
Rate of $70.00, plus any tolls and applicable surcharges.
         (i)   A rush hour surcharge of $5.00 will be added to this Flat Rate
for all trips beginning on a weekday after 4:00 p.m. and before 8:00 p.m. This
surcharge will not be applied on legal holidays.
         (ii)   The MTA Tax must be charged in addition to the Flat Rate.
         (iii)   The Taximeter must reflect that this trip is a Flat Rate fare.
      (2)   Metered Fare from Boroughs Other Than Manhattan. All Hail Trips to
Kennedy Airport from a borough other than Manhattan are governed by the metered
rate of fare as set forth in 35 RCNY §
82-26(a).
      (3)   Chairperson's Right to Suspend this Provision. The Chairperson is
authorized to suspend the enforcement of this provision at any time, if in the
judgment of the Chairperson such a suspension is necessary to preserve adequate
levels of service to and from Kennedy Airport.
   (c)   Trips Beyond the City that are Hail Trips. 
      (1)   For a trip beyond the limits of the City of New York, except for
Westchester or Nassau County, or Newark Airport, the fare will be a Flat Rate.
The MTA Tax must be added to the Flat Rate for any trip that starts in New York
City and ends in any of the following:
         (i)   Dutchess County;
         (ii)   Orange County;
         (iii)   Putnam County;
         (iv)   Rockland County;
         (v)   Suffolk County.
      (2)   For a trip to Westchester or Nassau County the fare will be the sum
of the following amounts:
         (i)   The amount shown on the Taximeter for that portion of the trip
that is inside the City limits, plus
         (ii)   Twice the amount shown on the Taximeter for that portion of the
trip that is outside the City limits, plus
         (iii)   All necessary tolls to and from the destination, and
         (iv)   The MTA Tax must be added to the total fare.
      (3)   For a trip to Newark Airport the fare will be the sum of the
following amounts:
         (i)   The amount shown on the Taximeter, plus
         (ii)   A surcharge of $20.00, plus
         (iii)   All necessary tolls to and from the destination.
      (4)   Any continuous trip where the point of origin and the destination
are both within the limits of the City of New York will not be considered a
trip beyond the City limits, even though the shortest and most direct route
requires traveling outside the City limits but within contiguous counties. The
Taximeter must be kept in the recording position throughout the trip.
   (d)   Rates of Fare for Pre-Arranged Trips. 
      (1)   Rates Must Not Exceed Scheduled Rates. A Street Hail Livery
Licensee or Driver must not quote or charge a fare on a pre-arranged trip that
is more than the fare listed in the Rate Schedule filed with the Commission.
   (e)   No Charge for Luggage or Mobility Aids. There will be no charge for:
      (1)   Steamer trunks or other luggage or belongings;
      (2)   Wheelchairs, crutches, three-wheeled motorized scooters and other
mobility aids transported in the interior of the Street Hail Livery;
      (3)   Use of the Vehicle's trunk.
   (f)   Tolls – How Tolls are Paid. 
      (1)   All Street Hail Liveries must be equipped with a New York MTA
Bridges & Tunnels EZ-Pass®. (See 35 RCNY §
82-27)
      (2)   When a Street Hail Livery drives through a toll plaza with an EZ-
Pass®, the MTA Bridges & Tunnels automatically deducts the cost of the toll
from an account maintained by the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
      (3)   Passengers must pay for the toll, but are only required to pay the
actual amount (often a discounted toll) charged to the EZ-Pass®.
      (4)   Drivers must collect the proper toll amount from the passenger and
forward it to the holder of the EZ-Pass® tag.
   (g)   Tolls – What Tolls are Paid by Passenger. 
      (1)   On all trips within the City of New York, the passenger must pay:
         (i)   All tolls incurred during the trip except for trips as follows:
            A.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge
to Queens.
            B.   From the Rockaway Peninsula over the Marine Parkway – Gil
Hodges Memorial Bridge to Brooklyn.
            C.   From Staten Island over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to
Brooklyn.
         (ii)   Two times the amount of the toll if incurred during the trip:
            A.   From Queens over the Cross Bay Veterans Bridge to the Rockaway
Peninsula.
            B.   From Brooklyn over the Marine Parkway – Gil Hodges Memorial
Bridge to the Rockaway Peninsula.
            C.   From Brooklyn over the Verrazzano Narrows Bridge to Staten
Island.
      (2)   On trips beyond the City of New York, the passenger must pay all
necessary tolls to and from the destination.
      (3)   A Driver who charges a passenger more than the actual amount of the
EZ-Pass® toll is guilty of an overcharge as prohibited by 35 RCNY §
80-17.
      (4)   A Driver who fails to reimburse an EZ-Pass® tag holder for all toll
charges incurred, including toll charges for which there is no passenger
reimbursement, will be subject to the provisions of 35 RCNY §
80-15(d).
      (5)   In addition to any other penalty permitted, the Commission may
order restitution to a passenger or the EZ-Pass® tag holder.
         (i)   Beginning on January 1, 2015, the Street Hail Livery Improvement
Surcharge must be collected in addition to any fare charged under subdivisions
(b) through (d) of this Section.
   (h)   Beginning on January 1, 2015, the Street Hail Livery Improvement
Surcharge must be collected in addition to any fare charged under subdivisions
(b) through (d) of this Section.
   (i)   E-Payments. 
      (1)   The payment for the fare for any trip paid for using an E-Payment
must not exceed Commission-approved rates.
      (2)   The fare must be calculated as required by these rules and the
Taximeter must be used for all trips not dispatched through a Base, including
trips paid for by E-Payment, unless it is a Flex Fare Trip. Any fare paid for
by E-Payment must be calculated by the Taximeter and not by any other method,
unless it is a Flex Fare Trip.
      (3)   The itemized fare amount charged to the Passenger must be
automatically transmitted to the E-Hail Application from the Technology System
or the Taximeter, and relevant payment data necessary to obtain a complete trip
record must be transmitted from the E-Hail Application to the Technology
System. Manual input of the fare by the Driver or any other person into the E-
Hail Application is not permitted.
      (4)   A violation of paragraphs (1) and (2) is an overcharge under 35
RCNY §
80-17(a)(1) and a Driver can be subject to the penalties for an overcharge
under 35 RCNY §
80-02.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a
82-26(i)    hearing; $500 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
(Amended City Record 9/25/2015, eff. 10/25/2015; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 8/19/2019, eff. 9/18/2019; amended City Record 11/18/2022, eff. 12/18/
2022; amended City Record 2/2/2023, eff. 3/4/2023; amended City Record 10/30/
2023, eff. 11/29/2023; amended City Record 8/22/2024, eff. 9/21/2024)
§ 82-27 Operations – EZ-Pass® Required.
   (a)   EZ-Pass® Account.
      (1)   All Licensees must participate in the EZ-Pass® New York Program by
maintaining a current account with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority,
Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ("MTA Bridges and Tunnels" or "MTA
B&T").
      (2)   A Licensee may participate in the EZ-Pass® New York Program through
the Licensee's Affiliated Street Hail Livery Base.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-27(a)
 
   (b)   EZ-Pass® Tags Required on all Street Hail Liveries.
      (1)   Licensees must either:
         (i)   Equip the Licensee's Street Hail Livery vehicle with its own MTA
Bridges and Tunnels EZ-Pass® tag, which must be attached as required by MTA
B&T, or
         (ii)   Allow a Driver to use his or her personal EZ-Pass® tag.
      (2)   Licensees must have available at least one MTA Bridges and Tunnels
tag for each Street Hail Livery.
      (3)   Licensees must maintain a sufficient balance in their EZ-Pass®
account, according to what is required by the program.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-27(b)
 
§ 82-28 Operations.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-29 Operations – Miscellaneous Requirements.
   (a)   Passenger Trips by Pre-Arrangement.
      (1)   No Street Hail Livery Licensee will allow the Licensee's Vehicle to
transport Passengers for hire on Pre-Arranged Trips other than through pre-
arrangement with a Base licensed by the Commission.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee will be liable for penalties for any
violation of this subdivision.
 
            Vehicle: During any license term, $100 for
35 RCNY §  the first violation during such term, with
82-29(a)    the penalty increasing by $100 for each    Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            subsequent violation up to a maximum of
            $10,000.
 
   (b)   Lost Property. Passenger lost property found in a Street Hail Livery
must be taken without delay to the Vehicle's Street Hail Livery Base unless it
can be returned to its rightful owner within a reasonable time.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 – 25Appearance REQUIRED
82-29(b)
 
   (c)   Lost Property – Notify the Commission. The Street Hail Livery Licensee
must promptly inform the Commission of any property that has been taken to the
Vehicle's Base as required by this section
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-29(c)
 
§ 82-30 Vehicle Condition – Inspections.
   (a)   Required Inspections. No new or replacement Street Hail Livery can
operate for hire unless it has been inspected and approved by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 and seizure of the vehicle Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-30(a)
 
   (b)   Biannual Inspection. A Licensee must have the Street Hail Livery
inspected every six months at a date and time designated by the Commission and
at any other time deemed necessary by the Commission. The Street Hail Livery
must be inspected at a Commission inspection facility. The License of a
Licensee whose Street Hail Livery is not timely inspected will be summarily
suspended.
 
            Fine: (penalties below are cumulative)
            0 - 30 days past inspection due date: $100 and
            Suspension until compliance
35 RCNY §  31 - 60 days past inspection due date: $100 -
82-30(b)    $250 and Suspension until compliance           Appearance REQUIRED
            61 - 120 days past inspection due date: $250 -
            $500 and Suspension until compliance
            More than 120 days past inspection due date:
            $500 and/or revocation.
 
   (c)   Components of Street Hail Livery Inspections. Except as provided in
(f) below, a Street Hail Livery inspection consists of (1) inspection to verify
compliance with the inspection items required by Section 301 of the New York
State Vehicle and Traffic Law, (2) visual inspection of the interior and
exterior of the Street Hail Livery to verify compliance with these Rules, and
(3) inspection to verify compliance with any other applicable laws, rules and
requirements.
   (d)   If a Street Hail Livery fails any component of the inspection, it must
be reinspected until it passes all components of the inspection. A Street Hail
Livery Vehicle which cannot pass inspection must be replaced.
   (e)   Street Hail Livery Vehicles Subject to On-Street Inspections. Street
Hail Liveries are subject to on-street inspections by TLC or any other agency
authorized by law.
   (f)   Special Requirements For Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
      (1)   Accessible Street Hail Liveries that are For-Hire Vehicles must
meet the requirements of subdivisions (a) through (e) above.
      (2)   Accessible Street Hail Livery that are Paratransit Vehicles must
meet the requirements of (a), (b), (d), and (e) above. Components of the
inspection of Paratransit Vehicles performed by the Commission will include
only a visual inspection to ensure compliance with the requirements for
Accessible Street Hail Liveries and a taximeter test. Paratransit Vehicles
remain subject to NYS Department of Transportation Inspection requirements.
      (3)   All Accessible Street Hail Liveries are subject to the following
additional requirements:
         (i)   The License of an Accessible Street Hail Livery which fails to
appear for inspection when required or when ordered by the Commission shall be
suspended.
         (ii)   Upon inspection of an Accessible Street Hail Livery, the date
of the inspection and signature of inspector must be recorded and posted in
each vehicle.
         (iii)   The License of an Accessible Street Hail Livery for which the
Licensee has been ordered by the Commission to repair or replace the Vehicle
shall be suspended 10 days after service of the notice to repair or replace,
unless the Licensee has complied within that period.
         (iv)   The License of an Accessible Street Hail Livery which is
suspended under this subdivision (f) and is not reinstated within 120 days
shall be terminated and may not be renewed or transferred.
§ 82-31 Vehicle Condition – Meet Safety Standards.
   (a)   While a Street Hail Livery is in operation, all equipment, including
brakes, tires, lights and signals must be in good working order and meet all
requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law, and the Rules of
the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
82-31(a)    hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (b)   A Licensee must comply with all notices and directives to correct
defects in the Street Hail Livery.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 and suspension until the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-31(b)    defective condition is corrected.
 
   (c)   A Licensee must repair or replace a Street Hail Livery when the
Commission or the New York State DMV (or the New York State Department of
Transportation if the Street Hail Livery is a Paratransit Vehicle) determines
that the vehicle is unsafe or unfit for use as a Street Hail Livery and directs
the Licensee to remove it from service. The Licensee must surrender the License
and Rate Card to the Commission for storage and the License will be suspended.
(NOTE: See 35 RCNY §
82-30(f) for special requirements applicable to Accessible Street Hail
Liveries).
      (1)   If the Chairperson has determined that the Vehicle is unsafe or
unfit, the Decals will be confiscated by the Chairperson.
      (2)   If the New York State DMV or a DMV inspection facility other than
the Commission has determined that the Vehicle is unsafe or unfit, the Licensee
must return the Decals to the Chairperson within 72 hours of issuance of the
determination.
      (3)   If the Chairperson has any reason to believe that any Street Hail
Livery is unsafe or unfit for use, the Chairperson can order the Vehicle to
report to the Commission's inspection facility.
      (4)   The License of a Licensee who operates a Street Hail Livery that
has been determined to be unsafe or unfit for use will be summarily suspended.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance
82-31(c)    Suspension until compliance                         REQUIRED
 
§ 82-32 Vehicle Condition – Miscellaneous.
   (a)   Clean. The Street Hail Livery's exterior and interior must be clean.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(a)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (b)   Trunk. The trunk compartment must be capable of securely holding
passengers' baggage.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(b)
 
   (c)   Shoulder Belts.
      (1)   Every Street Hail Livery must be equipped with shoulder belts for
both outside front seat positions and both outside rear seat positions.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – $25Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(c)(1)
 
      (2)   All seat belts and shoulder belts must be clearly visible,
accessible and in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – $25Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(c)(2)
 
   (d)   Correct Defect Directives. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must comply
with all Commission notices and directives to correct defects in the Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 and suspension until the Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(d)    defective condition is corrected
 
   (e)   Working Equipment. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must not permit a
Street Hail Livery to be operated unless equipment, including brakes, lights,
signals, and Passenger seatbelts and shoulder belts, are in good working order
and meet all the requirements of the New York State Vehicle and Traffic Law and
these Rules.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
82-32(e)    hearing; $200 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
   (f)   Post-Manufacture Alterations.
      (1)   No Street Hail Livery (except for an Accessible Street Hail Livery)
can be altered after manufacture:
         (i)   To increase its length, width, weight or seating capacity, or
         (ii)   To modify its chassis and/or body design.
   (g)   Proper Vehicle Identification Required.
      (1)   License Plate Number Matches. The license plate number on the state
registration certificate, and on the Commission Decals must match each other.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 if plead guilty before a
82-32(g)(1) hearing; $300 if found guilty following a Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            hearing.
 
      (2)   Vehicle Identification Number Matches. The last six digits of the
vehicle identification number (VIN) on the Commission Decals must match the
last six digits of the VIN on the state registration, and the VIN on the
Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(g)(2)
 
      (3)   T & LC License Plates. A Street Hail Livery must have New York
State license plates affixed to the Vehicle that are embossed with the legend
"T & LC." No "vanity" license plates are permitted.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: See § 82-12(b) and penalties for violation which apply Appearance
82-32(g)(3) here                                                          NOT
                                                                          REQUIRED
 
   (h)   Two-Door Vehicles Prohibited. No Street Hail Livery can be a two door
vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: Suspension of the Street Hail Livery Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(h)    License
 
         (i)   No Physical Movement of License or Decals. A Licensee must not
affix, remove or transfer a License to a new or replacement vehicle without
prior authorization of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(i)    days
 
   (j)   License Number on Roof Light. The License number on the front and rear
of the roof light must be clean and unobstructed so that the License number is
plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(j)    $75 if found guilty following a hearing.
 
   (k)   Illumination. When a Street Hail Livery is in operation for hire after
sunset, the following items must be illuminated so that they are clearly
visible from the rear seat:
      (1)   The face of the Taximeter;
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-32(k)(1)
 
      (2)   The TLC Driver License;
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(k)(2)
 
      (3)   The Rate Card.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
82-32(k)(3)
 
   (l)   Lighting Control. The dashboard dimmer switch or any other device must
not control the candlepower of the roof light, Taximeter light, card frame
light or interior lighting.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 dayAppearance N/A
82-32(l)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 82-33 Vehicle – Markings & Advertising.
   (a)   Approved Exterior Markings.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must apply to the exterior of the
Street Hail Livery the following markings approved by the Commission:
         (i)   Two Street Hail Livery logo decals
         (ii)   Two rate of fare decals
         (iii)   Two License number decals
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must obtain the approved Street Hail
Livery markings from a person or entity authorized by the Commission to print
and distribute the decals. A depiction of the decals and a list of persons
authorized to print and distribute the decals will be available on the
Commission's Website and/or through other means determined by the Commission
and announced on its Website.
      (3)   Accessible Vehicle Insignia.
         (i)   The design for insignia that will identify the vehicle as an
Accessible Street Hail Livery will be provided by the Commission on its Web
site or through other means presented on its Web site.
         (ii)   These insignia must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars
of a sedan or an SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both
sides of the Accessible Street Hail Livery, and will be visible to passengers
entering the Accessible Street Hail Livery.
      (4)   Clean Air Vehicle Insignia.
         (i)   The design for insignia that will identify the vehicle as a
Clean Air Vehicle will be provided by the Commission on its Web site or through
other means presented on its Web site.
         (ii)   These insignia must be located on the exterior of the C-pillars
of a sedan or an SUV or on the exterior of the D-pillars of a minivan, on both
sides of such Vehicle, and will be visible to passengers entering the clean air
Vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(a)
 
   (b)   Approved Decals and Emblems.
      (1)   A Licensee must not display emblems on the Street Hail Livery
exterior, other than an emblem identifying:
         (i)   The Street Hail Livery manufacturer.
      (2)   New Decals must be placed on the Vehicle by the Commission Safety
and Emissions Division:
         (i)   When the License is renewed; or
         (ii)   If the Vehicle is replaced, changes affiliation, or changes its
license plates.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance REQUIRED
82-33(b)(1)-(2)
 
   (c)   Base Station Affiliation Signs. A Street Hail Livery Licensee may
identify the vehicle's Affiliated Base Station on the exterior of the vehicle
if the base station marking conforms to the following specifications:
      (1)   The name of the Base Station, its License number and telephone
number must be displayed in one of the following ways:
         (i)   In letters and numerals at least one-and-one-half inches in
height, on the outside of a door or doors on both sides of the Vehicle, below
the windows and at least six inches above the bottom of the door(s);
         (ii)   In letters and numerals at least one inch in height in one
location on the rear of the Vehicle below the rear window, and at least six
inches above the bottom of the rear of the Vehicle, or
         (iii)   Both on the doors and rear of the Vehicle.
      (2)   The letters and numerals must be of a color that contrasts with the
color of the body of the Vehicle so that it is easy to see and read.
      (3)   Lettering and numbering must be spaced to provide easy legibility
and, if placed on doors on both sides of the Vehicle, must be identical on both
sides.
      (4)   All Decals must be semi-permanent adhesive stickers.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(c)
 
   (d)   Other Approved Markings. A Licensee must not display any lettering,
emblem, advertising or marking of any kind on the exterior of a Street Hail
Livery, including windows and exterior accessories, except for the following:
      (1)   Markings, inscriptions and/or advertising specifically permitted or
authorized by the Commission.
      (2)   Advertising that is authorized by the Commission on the Vehicle's
Rate Card and for which the Licensee has obtained a license from the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $25 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(d)
 
   (e)   Maintain in Good Condition. Required inscriptions and markings must be
maintained in good condition.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(e)
 
   (f)   Approved Interior Markings. A Licensee must not display inside a
Street Hail Livery any advertising or other notice not specifically authorized
by these rules or the Commission's Marking Specifications for Street Hail
Liveries unless approved by the Commission, except for the following:
      (1)   Industry signage/logos of all credit/debit cards accepted by the
Technology System, all of equal size, shown on the Technology System.
      (2)   Advertising on the Technology System or as set forth in the Street
Hail Livery Marking Specifications table (35 RCNY §
82-33(l)).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing; Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(f)(2) $75 if found guilty following a hearing
 
      (3)   Cyclist Awareness Decal. An Owner must equip all Street Hail
Liveries with decals provided by the Commission warning passengers to look for
cyclists before opening the door. Such decals must be placed on the inside of
both rear passenger doors.
 
            Fine: $50 if plead guilty before a hearing;
35 RCNY §  $75 if found guilty following a hearing. No Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(f)(3) penalty for missing decal if condition is
            corrected within 10 days
 
   (g)   Braille and Raised Lettering Plaques. The Licensee must equip the
Street Hail Livery with both of the following:
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery Identification Braille Plaque.
         (i)   This plaque must be made of .040 gauge aluminum with a matte
finish and measure 3 1/4 inches in length and 1 3/4 inches in height, with
radius corners.
         (ii)   The plaque must state, in Raster Braille grade two:
            A.   The Street Hail Livery License number centered on the first
line,
            B.   The word "COMPLAINTS" centered on the second line, and
            C.   The telephone number "311" centered on the third line.
         (iii)   The plaque must be permanently affixed on the door armrest of
the horizontal plane of the right rear door, or another location approved by
the Chairperson.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Identification Raised Lettering Plaque.
         (i)   This plaque must be made of 1/8-inch thick black acrylic plastic
and measure 11 inches in length and five inches in height, with radius corners
and four holes (one in each corner) for attachment with screws.
         (ii)   The plaque must state, in one inch high white Helvetica
lettering that is permanently affixed:
            A.   The License number centered on the first line,
            B.   The word "COMPLAINTS" centered on the second line, and
            C.   The telephone number "311" centered on the third line with
appropriate spacing between the three words.
         (iii)   The plaque must be permanently affixed on the rear of the
front right passenger seat or partition, not more than six inches below the
lexan or polycarbonate portion of the partition.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100. No penalty for missing plaque, if  Appearance N/A
82-33(g)(2) condition is corrected within forty-eight hour
 
   (h)   Valid Registration Sticker. A Valid registration sticker from the NYS
Department of Motor Vehicles must be affixed to the left front windshield so as
to be plainly visible.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(h)
 
   (i)   Inspection Sticker. A Valid New York State DMV inspection sticker that
has no fewer than six months left before the sticker expires must be plainly
visible on the front left side of the front windshield.
 
            Fine: $100 and suspension of the Street Hail
35 RCNY §  Livery License until any defect found is     Appearance REQUIRED
82-33(i)    corrected
            Penalty Points: 1.
 
   (j)   Street Hail Livery Color.
      (1)   Street Hail Livery Color. The exterior of the Street Hail Livery
vehicle must be painted Street Hail Livery designated color, except for the
trim. The specifications for Street Hail Livery designated color will be posted
on the Commission's Web site.
      (2)   Taxicab Yellow Prohibited. No part of a Street Hail Livery may be
painted any shade of Taxicab Yellow.
   (k)   Prohibited Advertising.
      (1)   A Licensee must not display any advertising on the exterior of a
Street Hail Livery unless the advertising has been authorized by the Commission
and a License has been issued following the provisions of the Administrative
Code. See 35 RCNY §
82-35.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-33(k)(1)
 
   (l)   Marking Specifications for Street Hail Liveries. 
INSCRIPTION* LOCATION SIZE 
INSCRIPTION*              LOCATION                   SIZE 
                          Both rear doors centered
                          left to right and located
                          in the upper half of the
                          flat surface between the
(a) Rate of fare decals   bottom edge of the door    The size of the approved
(required). (Non-         and the door handle.The    rate of fare decals must
detachable type only.)    base line of the rate of   be determined by the
                          fare and Street Hail       Commission.
                          Livery logo decals must be
                          parallel and the same
                          distance to the bottom
                          door edge.
                          Both front doors centered
                          left to right and located
                          in the upper half of the
                          flat surface between the
(b) Street Hail Livery    bottom edge of the door    The size of the Street
logo decals (required)    and the door handle.The    Hail Livery logo decals
(Non-detachable type      base line of the rate of   must be determined by the
only.)                    fare and Street Hail       Commission
                          Livery logo decals must be
                          parallel and the same
                          distance to the bottom
                          door edge.
(c) License number        Front and rear of roof     2 3/4" to 3" high letters
(required)                light.                     1/2" thick.
(d) License number,
interior (required). Can  On the back of the front
be one-piece decal or a   seat.The top of the number Numbers and letter must be
stencil. The number must  must be located not more   3" minimum in height.
be of a color contrasting than two inches below the
with the seat, to provide top of the front seat.
for easy legibility.
                          On the back of the front
                          seat or on a safety
                          partition, displayed in a
                          manner that is clearly
(e) Passenger Information visible to the passengers
Sign. (required) Must     in the back seat.If the
contain the information   vehicle is equipped with a Approximately 12" wide by
required by the           safety partition, the      6" high.
Commission.               passenger information sign
                          can be placed on the
                          partition behind the
                          Driver's head, but no
                          higher than a headrest
                          would be.
(f) "Drivers Wanted"
sign.Can include the      Rear of vehicle.           No more than 24" wide by
telephone number of the                              3" high.
Owner. (Optional)
(g) "If this vehicle is
parked for over 24 hours, Rear of vehicle or         No more than 24" wide by
please call Owner at      horizontal on dashboard.   3" high.
(telephone number) . . ."
(Optional)
(h) Brand name of         On the Technology System   Not to exceed 1 1/4" in
Technology System                                    height and 4" in length
(i) "This vehicle is
equipped with camera                                 Letters must be at least
security. YOU WILL BE     On rear passenger window   one-half inch high.
PHOTOGRAPHED." (Non-
detachable decals only)
                          The decals must be applied
                          to both rear quarter
                          panels, just below the
                          rear windows or following
                          the line created by the
                          bottom edge of the
                          windows, such that the     The size of the License
(j) License number decals number and checkerboard    number decals must be
(required). (Non-         are aligned and appear to  determined by the
detachable decals only.)  be one stripe.On some      Commission.
                          vehicles, such as
                          minivans, the License
                          number can be placed at
                          the rear of the sliding
                          door, but must still align
                          with the checkerboard
                          stripe.
(k) "Drivers are not
allowed to use cell       Interior of passenger
phones or handheld        compartment in a location  As issued by the
electronics." Decal or    plainly visible to         Commission
sticker shall be issued   passengers
by the Commission
(l) "Turning? People are  On the inside of the front
Crossing." The sticker    windshield, in the center
must be obtained pursuant and adjacent to the top of
to instructions posted on the windshield directly
the Commission's website  behind the rearview        3.5" wide by 2.5" high.
or through other          mirror, placed in such a
appropriate means         manner not to obstruct the
announced on the website. driver's view.
(required)
(m) "The choices you make
behind the wheel matter."
The sticker may be
obtained pursuant to
instructions posted on    On the rear bumper of the  15" wide by 4" high.
the Commission's website  vehicle.
or through other
appropriate means
announced on the website.
(optional)
(n) "Street Hail Livery   On the driver and
Hail Zone Decal." The     passenger side rear doors,
decal may be obtained     with the left-most point
pursuant to instructions  of the decal vertically    The size of the decal will
posted on the Commission  aligned with the left-most be determined by the
website or through other  point of the metered fare  Commission.
appropriate means         decal, and located two
announced on its website. inches below the base line
(required)                of the rate of fare
                          decals.
(o) "ATTENTION:           In Street Hail Livery
Assaulting A Driver Is    Vehicles with a partition,
Punishable By Up to       the sticker will be placed
Twenty-Five Years in      above the braille plaque
Prison." The sticker must on the partition. In
be obtained pursuant to   Street Hail Livery         8.0 x 2.0 inches.
instructions posted on    Vehicles without a
the Commission website or partition, the sticker
through other appropriate will be placed in a frame
means announced on its    on the passenger seat
website. (required)       headrest.
(p) "Taxi and Limousine
Drivers Are Protected By
New York State Law
ATTENTION: Assaulting a
driver is punishable by
up to twenty-five years   On a rear passenger
in prison." The sticker   window.                    3.5 x 3.5 inches.
may be obtained pursuant
to instructions posted on
the Commission website or
through other appropriate
means announced on its
website. (optional)
(q) The decal will
feature the International
Symbol of Access for
Hearing Loss, described   The decal will be placed
as the profile of an ear  in the Street Hail Livery
with a wide diagonal line Vehicles that are equipped
running from the bottom   with the Hearing Induction B-pillar decal will be 3.0
left to the top right.    Loop capability as         x 3.0 inches; the interior
The symbol contrast shall directed by the            passenger compartment
be light on dark or dark  Chairperson. For vehicles  decal dimensions will be
on light. A "T" will be   that are not OTVs but have as issued by the
placed in the lower       Hearing Induction Loop     Commission.
right-hand corner of each technology, place as
decal. The decal will     directed by the
include the language      Chairperson.
"Induction loop
installed. Switch hearing
aid to T-coil."
(r) Cyclist Awareness     Inside of both rear        As issued by the
Decals (required)         passenger doors            Commission
 
* Detachable signs suspended from door frames are not permitted.
   (m)   Special Exception for Accessible Street Hail Liveries that are also
Paratransit Vehicles.
      (1)   Accessible Street Hail Liveries that are also Paratransit Vehicles
must also comply with NYS marking requirements.
      (2)   Where such NYS requirements conflict with the requirements of this
Chapter, those NYS requirements will supersede the provisions of this Chapter.
      (3)   Where NYS requirements supersede the requirements of this Chapter,
the Licensee will work with the Chairperson to determine appropriate placement
of Commission markings.
(Amended City Record 1/28/2016, eff. 2/27/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 9/25/2025, eff. 10/25/2025)
§ 82-34 Vehicles – Items Required in Vehicle.
   (a)   The following must be present in the Street Hail Livery while it is in
operation for hire:
      (1)   The Street Hail Livery License;
      (2)   The Rate Card, in the Driver's License frame;
      (3)   An insurance card or photocopy, unless the Licensee is self insured
and has noted this fact on the Rate Card along with any other information
required by the Commission;
      (4)   On the right visor, on top of the right side of the dashboard, or
in the glove compartment:
         (i)   The certificate of registration or a legible copy of it;
         (ii)   The insurance card or a legible copy of it;
      (5)   Receipt for payment of NYC Commercial Motor Vehicle Tax;
      (6)   All other notices required to be posted in the Street Hail Livery.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $25 for each item not in vehicle, Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-34(a)(1)-(4) not to exceed $75 in the aggregate
 
      (7)   A means of collecting and recording all of the Trip Sheet data
which shall be the Technology System, or an alternate means of collecting Trip
Sheet data in the case of a Technology System malfunction.
      (8)   Passengers' Bill of Rights
      (9)   NYC Map
      (10)   A NYC Street Map for the Driver.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-35 Vehicle Equipment.
   (a)   Roof Light. A roof light is required on all Street Hail Liveries, as
required by the Hack-Up specifications in Subchapter B of this Chapter; the
Street Hail Livery Licensee must ensure compliance with the following:
      (1)   Controlled by Taximeter. The Street Hail Livery roof light must be
automatically controlled by the operation of the Taximeter so that it is
lighted only when the Taximeter is in an off position and unlighted when the
Taximeter is in a recording position or off duty position, or when the
Taximeter is detached from its bracket. A Licensee must not tamper with the
operation of the Street Hail Livery's roof light.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 – $350 and/or suspension up to 30 Appearance REQUIRED
82-35(a)(1) days
 
   (b)   Heating and Air Conditioning. Each Street Hail Livery must be equipped
with an operable heating and air conditioning system; when the vehicle is also
equipped with a partition, the air conditioning system must be able to provide
cool air to the rear passenger area.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 per day Appearance REQUIRED
82-35(b)
 
   (c)   Distress Signal Lighting. A Licensee must equip the Street Hail Livery
with a help or distress signaling light system meeting the requirements set
forth in Subchapter B of these Rules.
 
            Fine: $175 and suspension until the
35 RCNY §  condition is corrected. Respondent must     Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-35(c)    provide a condition corrected form issued
            by the TLC's Safety and Emissions Division.
 
   (d)   Optional Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   A Licensee may equip a Street Hail Livery Vehicle with an
authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture in accordance with 35 RCNY §
82-63.
      (2)   The Licensee must remove a Rooftop Advertising Fixture if the TLC
terminates such authorization in accordance with 35 RCNY §
82-63(d).
      (3)   A Licensee must not use any rooftop advertising fixture unless the
Licensee has obtained a permit to use such a fixture.
      (4)   A Licensee can use only an authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $200 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-35(d)(1)-(4)
 
      (5)   A Licensee shall be prohibited from installing any advertising
material if a Vehicle Owner reasonably objects to the express or implied
content of such material. A Vehicle Owner may, but cannot be compelled to,
waive this right to object by providing a Licensee a blanket prior written
consent to all advertising material. If such Vehicle Owner does not waive this
right, and there is a dispute with respect to such advertising, Licensee and
Vehicle Owner shall name a third party who shall decide any such dispute. If
the Licensee and Vehicle Owner cannot agree on who shall decide the dispute
they may obtain the assistance of any alternate dispute resolution service with
offices in the City of New York, the cost of which service will be equally
shared by the Licensee and the Vehicle Owner.
 
            Fine: $150 for every thirty days the
            advertising material is posted on the
35 RCNY §  street hail livery, if plead guilty before
82-35(d)(5) a hearing; $200 for every thirty days the  Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            advertising material is posted on the
            street hail livery, if found guilty
            following a hearing.
 
      (6)   The definition of Vehicle Owner for this subdivision includes the
title owner of the Street Hail Livery vehicle, or the long-term lessee of the
Street Hail Livery vehicle where the vehicle lease has a conditional purchase
agreement for the vehicle.
   (e)   Electronic Dispatching and E-Hail Device. In addition to the required
Technology System and the dispatch equipment required by the Licensee's
affiliated Base pursuant to 35 RCNY §
59B-15(d)(1), a Licensee may equip a Street Hail Livery with one electronic
device that is used to accept dispatches from a Base and/or E-Hails from a
licensed E-Hail application, provided that that the device is mounted in a
fixed position and not hand-held and use of the electronic device is limited to
either voice or one-touch preprogrammed buttons or keys while the Street Hail
Livery is in motion.
(Amended City Record 6/29/2015, eff. 7/29/2015; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City
Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021)
§ 82-36 Vehicle Equipment – Partitions.
   (a)   Requirement. A Street Hail Livery must be equipped with a partition
that isolates the Driver from the rear seat Passengers and meets the
requirements set forth in Subchapter B of these Rules.
 
            Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a hearing
            and supply a condition corrected form
35 RCNY §  issued by TLC's Safety and Emissions        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-36(a)    Division; $450 if found guilty following a
            hearing. Suspension until the condition is
            corrected.
 
   (b)   Exemptions.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery will be exempt from the requirements of
subdivision (a) if the Vehicle is equipped with all of the following safety
devices:
         (i)   An FCC-licensed commercial two-way radio with an emergency
button that would notify the dispatcher that the Driver is in trouble or a
cellular telephone that has an emergency dialing feature;
         (ii)   The distress signaling light required by 35 RCNY §
82-35(c), above;
         (iii)   An approved in-vehicle camera system.
   (c)   Curtain Airbags Modification.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery that is equipped with factory installed
curtain airbags must be equipped with a modified partition that does not extend
the full width of the interior of the Street Hail Livery.
      (2)   The modified partition instead must allow a space of six inches at
each side, sufficient to license proper deployment of the curtain airbags.
      (3)   The modified partition must conform in all other respects with the
applicable requirements of Subchapter B of this Chapter.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $300 and suspension until the condition Appearance REQUIRED
82-36(c)    is corrected
 
§ 82-37 Vehicle Equipment – In Vehicle Camera System (IVCS).
   (a)   When an existing in-vehicle camera system is required to be replaced
or when the system is installed, the Street Hail Livery must be equipped with
an IVCS that meets the specifications of Subchapter B; the system must be
installed and maintained by the manufacturer's authorized installer or a
Taximeter Business that meets the requirements of Subchapter B; and the IVCS
must be functioning and maintained in good working order.
 
            Fine: $350 if plead guilty before a hearing
            and supply a condition corrected form
35 RCNY §  issued by TLC's Safety and Emissions        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-37(a)    Division; $450 if found guilty following a
            hearing. Suspension until the condition is
            corrected.
 
   (b)   Each Street Hail Livery equipped with an IVCS must be equipped with a
cellular telephone as set forth in subdivision (b) of 35 RCNY §
82-36.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-37(b)
 
   (c)   Each Street Hail Livery equipped with an IVCS must display decals on
each rear passenger window, visible to the outside, that contain the following
information: "This vehicle is equipped with camera security. YOU WILL BE
PHOTOGRAPHED."
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-37(c)
 
§ 82-38 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeters.
   (a)   Taximeter Requirements. A Street Hail Livery Licensee must equip the
Street Hail Livery with a Taximeter subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The Taximeter must be of a make and type approved by the
Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-38(a)(1)
 
      (2)   The Taximeter's fare indicating mechanism must be affixed to the
vehicle's dashboard so that it is clearly readable and visible to all
passengers in the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-38(a)(2)
 
      (3)   The Taximeter's serial number or software version number must be
the same as that shown on the Rate Card assigned to the Street Hail Livery; or
entered on the Rate Card by a Licensed Taximeter shop.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-38(a)(3)
 
      (4)   The Street Hail Livery tire size must be the same as that for which
the Taximeter is calibrated, as indicated by the Rate Card.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-38(a)(4)
 
      (5)   All Taximeter seals must be installed by a Licensed Taximeter
repair shop or agent of the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
82-38(a)(5)
 
      (6)   The wiring harness leading from the Taximeter to the speed sensor
must have no unapproved intervening connectors, splices, "Y" connections, or
direct or indirect interruptions or connections of any kind whatsoever.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $500 Appearance REQUIRED
82-38(a)(6)
 
   (b)   Accuracy of Taximeter. A Street Hail Livery must be equipped with a
Taximeter that is in good working condition and will accurately compute the
rate of fare currently established by the Commission. Penalties for violation
are as follows:
      (1)   1% Inaccurate. The penalty is $50, if the Taximeter is found to be
at least 52.8 feet (one percent) inaccurate, but less than 264 feet (five
percent) inaccurate in computing distance, or more than one percent but less
than five percent inaccurate in computing time.
      (2)   5% Inaccurate. The penalty is $200, if the Taximeter is found to be
at least 264 feet (five percent) inaccurate but less than 528 feet (ten
percent) inaccurate in computing distance, or more than five percent but less
than ten percent inaccurate in computing time.
      (3)   10% Inaccurate. The penalty is $300, if the Taximeter is found to
be at least 528 feet (ten percent) inaccurate in computing distance or ten
percent inaccurate in computing time, for a first violation.
      (4)   Repeated 10% Inaccuracy. The penalty is $600, if the Taximeter is
found to be at least 528 feet (ten percent) inaccurate in computing distance or
ten percent inaccurate in computing time, for a second or subsequent violation
within thirty-six months.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-39 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeter Defects.
   (a)   No Defects in Taximeter or Installation. A Street Hail Livery must not
be in service for hire with a defective Taximeter or a Taximeter that has been
improperly installed.
   (b)   Repair or Replace Defective Taximeter. Whenever a Taximeter or its
installation is defective or whenever a Taximeter computes an inaccurate rate
of fare, the Licensee must have the Taximeter:
      (1)   Repaired, tested and certified at a licensed Taximeter Business, or
      (2)   Replaced by the Taximeter Business with an approved Taximeter that
has been inspected, tested and sealed;
   (c)   Assembly Must be Certified. After repair or replacement of the
Taximeter, the Taximeter/vehicle assembly must be tested and certified in
compliance with Commission regulations.
 
35 RCNY §   Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-39(a)-(c)
 
   (d)   Repairs by Licensed Agent. No adjusted, repaired or recalibrated
Taximeter or appurtenance of a Taximeter can be installed in a Street Hail
Livery unless the adjustment, repair or recalibration was done at a licensed
Taximeter repair shop or other authorized facility. The Licensee is responsible
for any installation that violates this rule.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $75 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-39(d)
 
§ 82-40 Vehicle Equipment – Taximeter & Technology System Tampering.
   (a)   Unauthorized Tampering. Unless authorized by the Commission, no person
may tamper with, alter, repair or attempt to repair any portion of the
Taximeter system that would affect the operation of the Taximeter or the
Technology System, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The Taximeter
      (2)   The Technology System
      (3)   Any seal affixed to the Street Hail Livery by a licensed Taximeter
repair shop or other authorized facility
      (4)   Any cable connection, cable system electrical wiring, or wireless
connections of a Taximeter or Technology System
      (5)   The vehicle's mechanism or its tires that would affect the
operation of the Taximeter or of the Technology System.
   (b)   Licensee's Responsibility. The Licensee is responsible for any
tampering, alteration or any unauthorized repair or attempt to repair.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 – 1,500 and/or suspension up to 30 days. Suspension until Appearance
82-40(a) &  compliance under to 35 RCNY §                                         N/A
(b)         68-16
 
   (c)   Licensee's Defense. It will be an affirmative defense to a violation
of this section that the Licensee:
      (1)   Did not know of or participate in the alleged tampering of the
Taximeter or Technology System; and
      (2)   Exercised due diligence to ensure that tampering with the Taximeter
or Technology System would not occur. Examples of a Licensee's due diligence
include, but are not limited to:
         (i)   Clearly warning Drivers that if they violate the Taximeter or
Technology System tampering rules, Licensee will:
            A.   Immediately terminate any lease agreement the Street Hail
Livery Licensee has with the Driver; and
            B.   Report the tampering violation to the Commission, which will
result in the probable revocation of their TLC Driver License;
         (ii)   Including the warning against violating the Taximeter and
Technology System tampering rules as a provision in any written lease
agreement;
         (iii)   Stamping the warning against violating the Taximeter and
Technology System tampering rules on any written Trip Records whenever paper
Trip Records must be issued to one or more Street Hail Livery Drivers;
         (iv)   Conducting periodic random comparisons of the odometer and the
Taximeter mileage readings of a Street Hail Livery to check for any
inappropriate disparities;
         (v)   Conducting periodic random inspections of the Taximeter and the
Technology System to detect any evidence of tampering; and
         (vi)   Having all of the Street Hail Livery inspected by a licensed
Taximeter shop once every inspection cycle.
   (d)   Notify the Commission of Tampered, Unauthorized or Removed Taximeter.
A Licensee must notify the Commission by telephone immediately, and in writing
within 24 hours, upon discovering any of the following:
      (1)   Any Taximeter other than the Taximeter approved by the Commission
(as indicated on the Rate Card) has been installed in the Street Hail Livery;
      (2)   Any Taximeter seal in the Street Hail Livery has been removed or
tampered with;
      (3)   Any unauthorized device has been connected to any Taximeter, or to
any seal, cable connection or electrical wiring, in the Street Hail Livery,
which can affect the operation of the Taximeter;
      (4)   Any intervening connections, splices, "Y" connections or direct or
indirect interruptions or connections of any kind whatsoever have been
discovered on any wiring harness attached to the Taximeter in the Street Hail
Livery.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $500 - $1,000 and/or suspension up to Appearance REQUIRED
82-40(d)(1)-(4) 60 days or revocation
 
   (e)   Inspections by Authorized Person.
      (1)   A Street Hail Livery's Taximeter must be tested for accuracy over a
measured mile course and its installation must be tested for compliance with
the rules of the Commission.
      (2)   Only personnel authorized by the Commission can perform these
tests.
      (3)   The inspections specified in paragraph one of this subdivision must
be completed and the results of the tests indicated on the Rate Card in each of
the following circumstances:
         (i)   At least once every 12 months.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $150 if plead guilty before a
82-40(e)(3)(i) hearing; $200 if found guilty following Appearance NOT REQUIRED
               a hearing.
 
         (ii)   Whenever a Taximeter is installed in a vehicle or when a
Taximeter's metrological system is updated.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-40(e)(3)(ii)
 
         (iii)   When the transmission or differential is altered, repaired or
replaced.
 
35 RCNY §       Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-40(e)(3)(iii)
 
         (iv)   When a change is made in any other part of the Street Hail
Livery that can affect the Taximeter reading.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $50 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-40(e)(3)(iv)
 
         (v)   At any other time required by the Commission.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $100 Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-40(e)(3)(v)
 
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-41 Vehicle Equipment – Technology System Installation.
   (a)   Required Installation. A Licensee must ensure that the Street Hail
Livery operating under a Street Hail Livery License is equipped with a
Technology System approved by the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY
Chapter 66.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $1,000 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-41(a)
 
   (b)   E-Hail Application. No E-Hail Application shall be used to process any
payment that is not a licensed E-Hail Application.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-42 Vehicle Equipment – Technology System Operation.
   (a)   Good Working Order. Licensees must ensure that the Technology System
equipment is constantly maintained and is in good working order.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-42(a)
 
      (1)   Accessible E-Hail Requests. While an Accessible Street Hail Livery
is in operation, the Technology System must be turned on and able to receive
Accessible E-Hail Requests.
         (i)   If the Technology System becomes incapable of receiving
Accessible E-Hail Requests:
            (A)   The Licensee, Agent or Base must replace or repair the
Technology System promptly upon being notified to do so (as specified by the
Commission) and in no event later than 48 hours after receiving such
notification.
 
35 RCNY §     Fine: $250 and suspension until Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-42(a)(1)(i) compliance
 
         (ii)   An Accessible Vehicle with a Technology System that is not
capable of receiving Accessible E-Hail Requests cannot operate for more than 48
hours without repair or replacement of the Technology System.
 
35 RCNY §      Fine: $250 and suspension until Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-42(a)(1)(ii) compliance
 
      (2)   No Tampering. An Agent or Licensee must not
         (i)   Tamper with the Technology System;
         (ii)   Tamper with the geographic locator equipment;
         (iii)   Disable the Technology System’s ability to receive Accessible
E-Hail Requests; or
         (iv)   Render the Accessible E-Hail Request functionality inoperable
in any way.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $350 and/or suspension up to 30 days Appearance REQUIRED
82-42(a)(2)
 
   (b)   Failure to Operate.
      (1)   If the Technology System malfunctions or fails to operate, an
incident report must be filed with the Technology System Provider within two
(2) hours following the discovery of the malfunction or at such time as the
Licensee reasonably should have known of the malfunction.
      (2)   If the Street Hail Livery Driver filed the incident report, the
Licensee will not be required to file a separate incident report but must
verify the filing by obtaining the incident report number.
      (3)   The Licensee must meet the appointment for repair scheduled by the
Technology System Provider following the incident report.
   (c)   48-Hour Repair Deadline. A Street Hail Livery in which any material
feature of the Technology System is not functioning must not operate more than
48 hours for Hail Trips following the timely filing of an incident report (Pre-
Arranged Trips are not subject to this requirement).
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 and suspension until compliance Appearance REQUIRED
82-42(c)
 
   (d)   Inspection upon Multiple Technology System Malfunctions. The Licensee
of any Street Hail Livery requiring six (6) or more repairs of the Technology
System in any thirty (30) day period must promptly take the vehicle for
inspection to, or schedule an inspection with, the Commission's Safety and
Emissions Facility. This requirement will not apply to the Licensee if
compliance is made by the Driver of the vehicle.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 Appearance REQUIRED
82-42(d)
 
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 4/2/2025,
eff. 5/2/2025)
§ 82-43 Penalty Points for For-Hire Vehicles.
   (a)   Four Penalty Points Requires License Revocation. The License of any
Street Hail Livery that accumulates four penalty points for violations during
any License term will be revoked.
   (b)   Points Accrued but not Assessed Before Renewal.
      (1)   If points are imposed after a Street Hail Livery License has been
renewed based on a violation that occurred before the renewal, the points will
be added to the total points accumulated by the Vehicle before its renewal.
      (2)   If the additional Points raise the total number to four or more
Points, the Street Hail Livery License will be revoked.
   (c)   Revocation Process.
      (1)   The Chairperson can begin revocation proceedings whenever a
Licensee has been assessed four or more points during the current term of that
License.
      (2)   The License can also be revoked as part of the decision imposing
the final point necessary for revocation.
      (3)   At any time revocation of a Base License is mandated and the last
penalty point arises from the same incident that created the Street Hail Livery
License revocation mandate, separate proceedings must be held for the Base
License revocation and the Street Hail Livery License revocation.
§ 82-44 License Transfers – Generally.
   (a)   Applicability of the "License Transfers" Sections.
      (1)   The "License Transfers" sections of this Chapter (35 RCNY §§
82-44 and
82-45), along with "Licensing" sections (35 RCNY §§
82-04,
82-05 and
82-06), establish the rules for all Transfers of a Street Hail Livery License
between and among private parties, either by:
         (i)   Purchase
         (ii)   Gift
         (iii)   Bequest, or
         (iv)   Operation of law.
      (2)   These provisions apply whether an Applicant seeks to acquire an
interest directly or indirectly, and also whether an Applicant seeks to acquire
full ownership, or only partial ownership, in a Street Hail Livery License.
These provisions also apply to any person or Business Entity seeking to
purchase an interest in a Business Entity owning a Street Hail Livery License.
      (3)   These provisions do not apply to the issuance or reissuance of
Street Hail Livery Licenses by the Commission.
   (b)   Overview of Requirements to Complete and Effect Transfer. The transfer
of an interest in a Street Hail Livery License will be complete and effective
upon all of the following:
      (1)   Documents. An Applicant must submit an application in the form
required by the Commission and all required supporting documentation.
      (2)   Proper Appearances. All persons described in 35 RCNY §
82-45(a) below must appear before the Commission.
      (3)   Fulfillment of the Licensing Requirements. The parties to the
transfer must fulfill the Licensing requirements set forth in 35 RCNY §§
82-04,
82-05 and
82-06.
      (4)   Transferring Technology System. The application for the transfer
must include the following information regarding Technology Systems on forms
approved by the Chairperson.
         (i)   Proof of Notice to Technology System Provider. 
            A.   The transferor must provide proof that notice of the transfer
has been sent to the Technology System Provider that holds the contract to
provide the Technology System for the Street Hail Livery License being
transferred.
            B.   The notice must be:
               1.   Sent at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of the
transfer (NOTE: The Technology System Provider may waive the 30 day requirement
by signing the form),
               2.   Sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and
               3.   Sent to the address specified in the contract.
            C.   Proof of notice will be:
               1.   A copy of the notice,
               2.   A copy of the certified mail receipt, and
               3.   An affidavit or affirmation under penalty of perjury
verifying the mailing.
         (ii)   Transferor's Statement of Intent. The Transferor must provide a
statement of intent on forms approved by the Chairperson to:
            A.   Cancel the contract with the Technology System Provider and
return the Technology System equipment to the Technology System Provider, or
            B.   Assign the contract to the Transferee and transfer the
equipment to the Transferee, or
            C.   Retain the Technology System equipment, if the Transferee owns
the Technology System equipment.
         (iii)   Transferee's Statement of Intent. The Transferee must provide
a statement of transferee's intent on forms approved by the Chairperson to:
            A.   Assume the Transferor's contract with the Technology System
Provider, or
            B.   Identify the approved Technology System Provider which the
Transferee intends to use to provide the Technology System.
      (5)   Clearance of open items. All open items against the Street Hail
Livery Licensee (including any Business Entity Person if the Licensee is a
Business Entity) must be cleared, including but not limited to summonses issued
by the Commission, outstanding fines and penalties owed to the Commission or
the Parking Violations Bureau (or their successors), and incomplete License
renewal requirements.
      (6)   Commission Approval. No transfer is effective until the Commission
approves the application, in writing.
   (c)   Comply with Transfer Provisions.
      (1)   No person or entity is permitted to attempt to transfer or
participate in the transfer of an interest in any Street Hail Livery License
without fulfilling the requirements of subdivision (b) above, as applicable.
      (2)   The mere act of submitting a transfer application to the
Chairperson will not be considered a violation of this subdivision.
 
            Fine: $10,000 per entity, per License and
            attempted transfer invalid, applicable to
35 RCNY §  any person or persons (transferor,        Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-44(c)    transferee or both) whose actions
            constituted a violation;
            Revocation may be ordered.
 
(Amended City Record 12/10/2015, eff. 1/9/2016; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-45 License Transfers – Special Requirements.
   (a)   Personal Appearance.
      (1)   All Applicants seeking approval to own an interest in a Street Hail
Livery License must appear in person as directed by the Chairperson.
      (2)   If the Applicant is a Business Entity, the following Business
Entity Persons must appear in person before the Commission (unless the
Chairperson waives this requirement):
         (i)   All individual shareholders of a corporate entity
         (ii)   All general partners of a partnership entity
         (iii)   All members of a Limited Liability Company.
   (b)   Preserve Street Hail Livery Category. An Applicant seeking approval to
hold a Street Hail Livery License restricted to use with an Accessible Street
Hail Livery or an interest in such License must continue to use that License
with an Accessible Street Hail Livery. Restriction on Number of Licenses. An
Applicant seeking approval to hold a Street Hail Livery License or an interest
in a Street Hail Livery License must comply with the ownership provisions of 35
RCNY §
82-06(a).
   (c)   Transfers – Special Provisions Regarding Estates and Incompetency. 
      (1)   Notice. Notice of the death or the declaration of incompetency of a
Street Hail Livery Licensee must be given to the Chairperson promptly upon the
occurrence. A Street Hail Livery Licensee which is a Business Entity must also
give prompt notice upon the death or the declaration of incompetency of a
shareholder, partner, or member of a Business Entity.
 
35 RCNY §  Fine: $250 for failure to comply Appearance NOT REQUIRED
82-45(c)(1)
 
      (2)   Distribution of Interest in Street Hail Livery License to a
Legatee. When a Street Hail Livery License(s) or an interest in a company or
corporation that owns a Street Hail Livery License(s) is distributed from an
estate, the Legatee recipient must qualify as a Transferee under the applicable
rules of this Chapter, and must submit the following additional documents to
the Commission:
         A.   A certified copy of the death certificate of the former Licensee
or Business Entity Person listed with the Commission;
         B.   A certified copy of letters testamentary or letters of
administration and, for an estate not in New York, a certified copy of
ancillary letters testamentary or letters of administration covering the
estate's New York property, which letters:
            1.   Must have been issued no earlier than six months prior to the
date of submission; and
            2.   The amount of estate assets that the Executor is authorized to
administer must be in excess of the value of the Street Hail Livery License(s)
that is to be operated or transferred.
         C.   A certified copy of the will, if any.
      (3)   Additional Requirements for Temporary Operation of a Street Hail
Livery License. 
         (i)   If an owner of an interest in a Street Hail Livery License dies
or is declared incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Street
Hail Livery License can continue to be operated by the administrator or
representative of the owner or the owner's estate for up to 120 days following
the date of death or declaration of incompetency.
         (ii)   The administrator or representative will have 120 days from the
date of death or declaration of incompetency to transfer the Street Hail Livery
License to a transferee that is qualified to own the Street Hail Livery
License, as provided in this Chapter, and is approved to hold the Street Hail
Livery License.
         (iii)   If no one has been approved by the Commission to hold the
Street Hail Livery License by the end of the 120-day period, the Street Hail
Livery License must be placed in storage until a qualified transferee is
approved to hold the Street Hail Livery License.
 
35 RCNY §  Revocation may be ordered if Street Hail
82-45(c)    Livery License is operated beyond, or not Appearance NOT REQUIRED
            transferred by, the periods specified.
 
(Amended City Record 12/10/2015, eff. 1/9/2016)
**** Subchapter B: Rules for Street Hail Livery Hack-up and Maintenance ****
§ 82-46 Subchapter B: Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the standards and requirements for preparing a vehicle
for Street Hail Livery Licensing, and
   (b)   To establish the standards and requirements for Street Hail Livery
maintenance, inspection and retirement.
§ 82-47 Penalties.
   (a)   This Subchapter is informational in nature and does not contain
penalties. Penalties for failure to follow the rules established in this
Subchapter will be found in Subchapter A of this Chapter and
35 RCNY Chapter 80 which establish specific requirements for Street Hail Livery
Drivers and Licensees.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 82-48 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Safety and Emissions Inspection means the required vehicle inspections
conducted at the Commission's inspection facility.
§ 82-49 Standard Specifications for Street Hail Liveries.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-50 Standard Specifications for Accessible Street Hail Liveries.
   (a)   An Accessible Street Hail Livery must be designed for the purpose of
transporting persons in wheelchairs or must contain a physical device or
alteration designed to permit access to and enable the transportation of
persons using wheelchairs in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities
Act.
      (i)   An Accessible Street Hail Livery must meet the safety and design
specifications set forth in 35 RCNY §
59C-04.
   (b)   An Accessible Street Hail Livery must also be equipped with restraints
to secure a wheelchair in place in the vehicle.
(Amended City Record 12/9/2020, eff. 1/8/2021; amended City Record 9/25/2025,
eff. 10/25/2025)
§ 82-51 Requirements for Hacking Up a Street Hail Livery.
   (a)   A vehicle that is currently licensed as a for-hire vehicle as of July
1, 2013 or thereafter can be hacked up for use as a Street Hail Livery.
   (b)   Continuation in Service. Upon Hack-up, a vehicle may continue in
service with the same Street Hail Livery License so long as the vehicle passes
inspection pursuant to 35 RCNY §
82-30.
§ 82-52 Requirements for Hack-up – Paint, Finish and Lighting.
   (a)   Apple Green. The exterior of the vehicle must be painted Apple Green
(paint codes Dupont – GS028 or PPG – 502757 or similar), except for the trim.
Samples of paint color and code are to be submitted to the Chair for approval
if not those specified.
   (b)   Front Design. There must be no unnecessary projections such as rigid
hood ornaments.
   (c)   Signs. The vehicle must be provided with signs that conform to the
marking specifications in 35 RCNY §
82-33.
   (d)   Roof Light. The vehicle must be equipped with an approved Roof Light.
§ 82-53 Requirements for Hack-up – Occupant Accommodation.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-54 Requirements for Hack-up – Taximeters.
   (a)   Requirement. The vehicle must be equipped with a sealed, tamper-
resistant Taximeter installed by a Licensed Taximeter Business according to the
rules and regulations in
35 RCNY Chapter 64. The Taximeter must be installed in a location approved by
the Chairperson which allows safe operation of the vehicle and visibility to
the passenger.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. The Taximeter must meet the specifications
and tolerances published in the most recent National Institute of Standards and
Technology Handbook, and must be approved for use in New York by the NYS
Department of Agriculture and Markets and by the Commission. Any new Taximeter
model will be subject to a minimum three month test period before approval.
   (c)   Other Technical Requirements.
      (1)   The Roof Light must be controlled by engaging the Taximeter.
      (2)   The Taximeter must be capable of calculating and displaying all
required rates of fare.
      (3)   The Taximeter must be capable of transferring data to the
Technology System manufactured by any Commission-licensed Technology System
Provider which has chosen to use the Taximeter.
      (4)   The Taximeter and all connections must be secure and tamper proof.
All switches, wiring and caps must meet applicable specifications of the
Society of Automotive Engineers.
      (5)   The Taximeter must not allow a Driver to use an unauthorized rate
code in an unauthorized area.
      (6)   The Roof Light must be unlighted when the Taximeter is detached
from its bracket.
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-55 Requirements for Hack-up – Technology System.
   (a)   Requirement. The vehicle must be equipped with a Technology System
approved by the Commission pursuant to 35 RCNY
Chapter 66 and installed by a Technology System Provider in accordance with 35
RCNY
Chapter 66.
   (b)   [Reserved.]
(Amended City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 82-56 Requirements for Hack-up – Partitions.
   (a)   Requirement.
      (1)   Unless exempt under 35 RCNY §
82-36(b), the vehicle must be equipped with a partition that isolates the
driver from the rear seat passengers or all passengers of the vehicle.
      (2)   The purpose of the partition is to provide protection to the driver
while ensuring passenger safety and enabling rear seat passengers to have a
clear and unobstructed view of the TLC Driver License, Rate Card, and front
windshield.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   The partition must extend from the ceiling to a specific point as
recommended by the Chairperson and approved by the Commission, based upon the
make and model of the vehicle.
      (2)   The transparent portion of the partition must be constructed of a
mar-resistant polycarbonate not less than 0.375 inches thick that will provide
passengers and drivers with maximum visibility.
         (i)   For a flat partition and a partition for a Street Hail Livery
with factory installed curtain airbags, the transparent portion must extend
from the ceiling to join or overlap with the protective plate of the partition.
         (ii)   For an L shaped partition, on the side that is behind the
driver, the transparent portion of the partition must extend from the ceiling
to join or overlap with the protective plate of the partition. On the side that
extends forward to back between the two front seats, the transparent portion of
the partition must extend from the ceiling to join or overlap with the
protective plate of the partition on the right side of the center console
located between the two front seats.
      (3)   The protective plate must join or overlap with the transparent
portion of the partition and extend downward to the floor of the vehicle. The
protective plate must be a plate of 0.085-inch thick bullet-resistant ballistic
steel or its equivalent recommended by the Chairperson and approved by the
Commission. The protective plate must be installed inside and covering the
front seat's entire backrest.
         (i)   The protective plate must extend from the point that the
transparent portion joins it downward to the floor of the Street Hail Livery.
         (ii)   If the transparent portion overlaps the protective plate, the
protective plate must extend from the point of joinder with the transparent
portion downward to the floor of the Street Hail Livery.
      (4)   For an L shaped partition, the protective plate must also cover the
right side of the center console between the two front seats.
      (5)   The entire protective plate of each partition must have sufficient
padding to prevent injury to any rear-seat passenger in case of a Collision or
sudden stopping, and all surfaces must be free of sharp and rough edges.
      (6)   There must be no opening or gap between the partition and the body
of the vehicle larger than one inch, except for vehicles equipped with factory
installed curtain airbags. In those vehicles, the partition shall allow a space
of six inches on each side, sufficient to license proper deployment of the
curtain airbags.
      (7)   In addition to meeting all other technical specifications, a
partition may be installed only if it does not impair passenger and driver
safety and has the following features:
         (i)   Allows passengers and drivers to communicate with each other
         (ii)   Allows passengers in the rear passenger compartment to pay
fares by cash or by credit card and to receive receipts for payments and
transactions.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016)
§ 82-57 Requirements for Hack-up – Distress Signal Lights.
   (a)   Requirement. A Licensee must equip the Street Hail Livery with a help
or distress signaling light system consisting of two turn signal type
"lollipop" lights.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   One light must be mounted on the front center of the vehicle,
either on top of the bumper or forward or behind the grill. A second light must
be mounted on top of the rear bumper, to the left of the license plate.
      (2)   Each light must be three to four inches in diameter, have a total
rated output of 32 candle power, and be amber-colored or have an amber-colored
lens so that the light output of the device is the color amber at 32 candle
power.
      (3)   The activator must be installed within easy reach of the driver,
must be silent when operating, and must be fully solid-state.
      (4)   The lights must be able to flash between 60 and 120 times per
minute.
      (5)   The wiring must not affect or interfere with, directly or
otherwise, any wiring or circuitry used by the meter for measuring time or
distance.
§ 82-58 Requirements for Hack-up – In-Vehicle Camera System ("IVCS").
   (a)   Requirement. When an existing IVCS is required to be replaced or when
an IVCS system is installed (including, but not limited to, at Hack-up), it
must be functioning and in good working order and meet the specifications and
installation requirements below.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. 
      (1)   Frequency. The IVCS must capture at least one image per second, or
capture video, while the engine is running and for at least ten (10) minutes
after the engine is shut off.
      (2)   Quality. The IVCS must record sharp, undistorted, and clear images
or video to enable the viewer to identify all passengers under all lighting
conditions, including but not limited to dark and bright light, daylight, and
backlight.
      (3)   Scope. The IVCS must be able to capture the full face of all
occupants of the vehicle, including the driver.
      (4)   Stamping. The IVCS must record the following information on each
image or video frame:
         (i)   Date and time,
         (ii)   Vehicle license number, and
         (iii)   IVCS serial number.
      (5)   Indicator. The IVCS must indicate when the camera is operational
and when there is a malfunction.
      (6)   Retention. The IVCS must retain images or video for at least thirty
(30) days.
      (7)   Stability. The IVCS must be fastened securely with tamper-resistant
hardware.
      (8)   Installation and repairs. Installations and repairs of IVCS may be
performed only by:
         (i)   Installers currently licensed by the Department of Consumer and
Worker Protection or successor agency, or
         (ii)   Taximeter Businesses.
      (9)   Access. The IVCS must be accessible in the following ways:
         (i)   The IVCS and its contents, including image or video, may only be
accessible to the Vehicle Owner and the Taximeter Business or licensed
installer that installed the IVCS.
         (ii)   The Taximeter Business or licensed installer must provide image
or video access to law enforcement agencies, including the New York City Police
Department, the Vehicle Owner, and the Vehicle Driver, upon request, in
standard digital formats.
      (10)   Inspection and approval. Only IVCS models approved by TLC may
satisfy the requirements of this section.
         (i)   After an approved IVCS model is installed, the Vehicle Owner
must provide for inspection a notarized affidavit that includes images taken by
the camera within 14 calendar days after installation, or after repair or
modification after an approved IVCS model is installed.
      (11)   Recordkeeping. IVCS manufacturers must keep a record of the IVCS
installed in each TLC licensed vehicle with the following information:
         (i)   The name of the camera model,
         (ii)   The name of the licensed installer,
         (iii)   The date of installation, and
         (iv)   TLC vehicle license number.
         (v)   The data must be made available to the Commission on a regular
basis as determined by S&E, and on demand.
(Amended City Record 9/22/2023, eff. 10/22/2023)
§ 82-59 Requirements for Hack-up – Credential Holders.
   (a)   Requirement. A credential holder must be mounted behind the driver in
the vehicle in a manner that does not block the driver's view. The holder will
be on the partition if there is a partition, or on the headrest if there is no
partition.
   (b)   Technical Specifications. A credential holder frame mounted on the
driver's side of the clear portion of the partition must conform to the
following:
      (1)   Be approved by the Commission.
      (2)   Be secured by either rivet or screw at least two inches above the
frame supporting the clear portion of the partition and centered on the
vehicle's steering column or the headrest on the driver's seat facing the rear
passenger's compartment.
      (3)   The frame must have a drop-in or slide-in slot accessible only from
the driver's compartment for the rate card and the driver's license.
      (4)   The frame must have sufficient illumination so that the rate card
and the driver's license are clearly visible from the rear seat after dark.
      (5)   The frame must be sufficiently padded so as not to cause injury to
the driver.
§ 82-60 Requirements for Hack-up – Air Conditioning.
   (a)   Requirement. All vehicles must be equipped with an air conditioner.
The air conditioner must be in good working condition from May 1st through
September 30th each year. In vehicles equipped with a partition, the air
conditioner must include an auxiliary unit for the rear seating area.
   (b)   Technical Specifications.
      (1)   The auxiliary unit must be either standard equipment or optional
equipment built into the vehicle by the vehicle manufacturer.
      (2)   The auxiliary unit must have controls that passengers may operate
in the rear passenger area.
§ 82-61 Scheduled Vehicle Retirement.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-62 Vehicle Retirement Extensions.
[Reserved.]
§ 82-63 Authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
   (a)   Authorized Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   Upon payment of an annual Advertising Permit Fee as described in 35
RCNY §
82-08(j), a Street Hail Livery Licensee may install and maintain an authorized
Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (2)   A Street Hail Livery Licensee must not install or maintain a
Rooftop Advertising Fixture that is not authorized, or no longer authorized, by
TLC.
   (b)   Requirements for Obtaining Commission Approval of a Rooftop
Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must be tested and certified in
accordance with the Department of Defense Test Standard MIL-STD 810f by a
licensed Professional Engineer and documentation of testing and certification
must be submitted to the Commission. (MIL-STD 810f can be found at http://
www.dtc.army.mil/navigator.)
      (2)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must be approved by the
Commission's Safety and Emissions Division.
      (3)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider may post advertisements on
the Rooftop Advertising Fixture. Such advertisements:
         (i)   must not exceed the physical dimensions of the advertising
display surface of the rooftop unit
         (ii)   Exception: An advertisement can exceed the dimensions of the
advertising display surface of the rooftop unit by no more than 100 square
inches if the certification by a Professional Engineer as required in paragraph
one of this subdivision specifically states that the extension is safely
supported upon the Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (4)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture must:
         (i)   be two-sided, each side of a shape that is longer across and
shorter in height, although not necessarily a rectangle;
         (ii)   display advertising material to the sides of the vehicle, and
         (iii)   not display advertising material to the front and back of the
vehicle.
      (5)   Variation in approved design.
         (i)   If the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider wants to deviate
from an approved design, it must inform the TLC of any material variation in
the original, approved design before installing a modified fixture.
         (ii)   The TLC shall, within fourteen (14) business days, inform the
Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider whether an additional authorization is
required with respect to the modified Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
   (c)   Maintenance of Rooftop Advertising Fixture. The Rooftop Advertising
Fixture Provider must maintain the Rooftop Advertising Fixture in accordance
with this Rule:
      (1)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must ensure that the
Rooftop Advertising Fixture
         (i)   is firmly affixed to each Street Hail Livery;
         (ii)   is otherwise operating in a safe manner;
         (iii)   is in good working order; this includes that the advertising
displayed on the fixture is firmly affixed; and
         (iv)   displays current advertisements. A current advertisement is one
that includes, but is not limited to, a defined event (such as advertisements
for movies, concerts or events which have fixed opening or running dates) and
only remains current until 60 days following the completion or termination of
the event, or promotes an existing business or consumer product.
      (2)   (i) The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must not display
advertising that is offensive to public morals or is otherwise in violation of
New York Penal Law Section 245.11.
         (ii)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider must remove any
advertising in violation of subparagraph (i) from public display within fifteen
(15) days after a TLC request to remove such advertising.
   (d)   Termination of Authorization of Rooftop Advertising Fixture.
      (1)   The Chairperson may terminate authorization of a Rooftop
Advertising Fixture if the provider has not complied with the requirements
stated in this Rule.
         (i)   Prior to terminating authorization, the Chairperson will give
the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider notice of the Chairperson's intent to
terminate authorization and shall provide detailed reasons for the action.
         (ii)   The Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider shall have 21 business
days after the notice to cure any defect or to respond to any concerns set
forth in the notice unless the TLC extends the cure period.
         (iii)   If the Rooftop Advertising Fixture Provider fails to cure any
defect or fails to respond to any concerns set forth in the Chairperson's
notice to the satisfaction of the Chairperson within the time period allotted
by the TLC, the Chairperson may promptly terminate authorization.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the notice requirements of paragraph one, TLC may
immediately terminate authorization of a Rooftop Advertising Fixture if the
Chairperson determines there is an imminent threat to the health or safety of
members of the public, drivers of Street Hail Liveries, or other individuals.
**** Subchapter C: Grants for Accessible Street Hail Liveries ****
§ 82-64 Scope of this Subchapter.
   (a)   To establish the standards and requirements for persons applying for a
grant to purchase or upfit a vehicle to be used as an Accessible Street Hail
Livery.
   (b)   To establish standards and requirements for persons who receive a
grant under this Subchapter.
   (c)   No more than $54,000,000 in grants will be issued under this
Subchapter.
§ 82-65 Definitions Specific to this Subchapter.
   (a)   Accessible Vehicle in this Subchapter means a Vehicle to be used as an
Accessible Street Hail Livery.
   (b)   Assignor means the Grantee assigning, through a Payment Assignment
Agreement, the Grantee's right, title and interest for all payments arising
under a Grant Program Agreement.
   (c)   Grant means the funds awarded to a Grantee to be applied towards the
costs of the purchase or retrofitting of a Qualified Vehicle to be used with an
Accessible Street Hail Livery License.
   (d)   Grant Applicant means the individual or Business Entity applying for a
Grant under this Chapter.
   (e)   Grant Program Agreement means the agreement document entered into by
the Grantee which contains the terms and conditions required to receive Grant
funding.
   (f)   Grantee means a Grant Applicant who has submitted and completed all of
the requirements of the Grant Program Agreement, and who has been approved for
a Grant.
   (g)   Qualified Vehicle means a Vehicle to be used as an Accessible Street
Hail Livery and that meets all of the following:
      (1)   The vehicle has fewer than 1,000 miles on the odometer.
      (2)   The vehicle is of a model year that is of the current or next two
most recent model years at the time the Grant Applicant applies for a Grant.
      (3)   The vehicle must be capable of being used as an Accessible Street
Hail Livery and
         (i)   must have otherwise been manufactured by an original equipment
manufacturer ("OEM") to be an Accessible Vehicle in a program approved in
advance by the Chairperson; or
         (ii)   must have been modified following manufacture by OEM-approved
second-stage manufacturer in a program approved in advance by the Chairperson;
or
         (iii)   must be manufactured or modified in a way approved in advance
by the Chairperson.
(Amended City Record 1/13/2017, eff. 2/12/2017)
§ 82-66 Grant Eligibility.
   (a)   An individual or Business Entity which holds or is applying for an
Accessible Street Hail Livery License is eligible to apply for a Grant.
   (b)   An individual or Business Entity which holds an Accessible Street Hail
Livery License, and meets all of the requirements of the Grant Program
Agreement and these Rules, is eligible to receive a Grant.
§ 82-67 Grant Application.
   (a)   Accessible SHL License required. No Grant will be issued to any person
or Business Entity which does not hold an Accessible Street Hail Livery
License.
   (b)   Application. A Grant Applicant must file an application for a Grant on
the form and in the manner specified by the Chairperson and must provide all
documentation required. The Grant Applicant is subject to all requirements of
this Chapter regarding representations and information provided to the
Chairperson.
   (c)   Grant Program Agreement. A Grant Applicant must file a Grant Program
Agreement on the form and in the manner specified by the Chairperson and must
provide all documentation required.
   (d)   Qualified Vehicle. With the Grant application, or within 60 days of
the Grant application, a Grant Applicant must present:
      (1)   Proof of purchase by the Grant Applicant of a Qualified Vehicle in
the form specified by the Chairperson, and
      (2)   if the vehicle at the time of purchase has not been modified so
that it qualifies as an Accessible Street Hail Livery, proof in the form
specified by the Chairperson of an approved vendor program letter or equivalent
document approved by the Commission issued by the OEM or OEM-approved second-
stage manufacturer which states that the vehicle will be, once modified, a
Qualified Vehicle.
   (e)   No Outstanding Fines or Fees. No grants will be issued to any Grant
Applicant who owes the Commission any money for fines, fees, or other reasons
or who has any open summonses issued by the Chairperson outstanding against him
or her.
   (f)   Other Causes for Denial. The Chairperson can deny a Grant application
for any reason, in his or her sole discretion. In addition to other reasons set
forth in this Subchapter, the Chairperson will deny an application for a Grant
if any of the following is true:
      (1)   The Grant Applicant has failed to submit all required paperwork
within 60 days of submitting the Grant application.
      (2)   The history of the Grant Applicant as a licensee of the Commission
indicates that, in the judgment of the Chairperson, a Grant should not be
awarded.
      (3)   There are material errors or omissions in the Grant application or
accompanying documentation.
      (4)   A Qualified Vehicle is not hacked up and/or has not passed
inspection within 180 days of the date that the Accessible Street Hail Livery
License is issued.
(Amended City Record 1/13/2017, eff. 2/12/2017)
§ 82-68 Grant Amounts and Payments.
   (a)   Grant Amounts.
      (1)   Accessible Vehicles. The Grant consists of a single payment of
$14,000 to be paid following the successful Hack-up of the Qualified Vehicle,
and subsequent payments of $2,000 to be paid following each successful bi-
annual vehicle inspection. The initial payment amount of $14,000 will be
approved only for Qualified Vehicles which, at the time the Grant application
is submitted, meet all of the following:
         (i)   Be of the most recent model year or the next two most recent
model years and,
         (ii)   Have fewer than 1,000 miles on the odometer.
         (iii)   For subsequent payments to be paid to the Grantee, the
Qualified Vehicle must have, between the most recent successful bi-annual
vehicle inspection and the successful bi-annual inspection previous to the most
recent successful bi-annual inspection:
            A.   completed at least 250 Passenger trips registered through the
Technology System, and
            B.   during this period, has been logged onto the Accessible Taxi
Dispatch system through the Dispatch Equipment while in operation.
      (2)   Only one Grant will be awarded for each Qualified Vehicle based on
the Vehicle Identification Number (VIN).
      (3)   An Accessible Street Hail Livery Licensee, who receives a Grant and
completes all of the requirements of the Grant Program Agreement during the
full term of the Grant Program Agreement, may apply for a subsequent Grant to
be used to replace their current Qualified Vehicle with another Qualified
Vehicle.
   (b)   Grant Payment.
      (1)   Payment. No funds will be released for a Grant for any approved
application until the Qualified Vehicle is hacked up and has passed the
inspection required by 35 RCNY §
82-30.
      (2)   Grant payments will be made only to Grantees who are in full
compliance with the requirements of the Grant Program Agreement.
(Amended City Record 1/13/2017, eff. 2/12/2017; amended City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018; amended City Record 12/11/2018, eff. 1/10/2019)
§ 82-69 Grantee Requirements.
   (a)   Services.
      (1)   Grantee must ensure that the Qualified Vehicle purchased or
retrofitted using Grant funds remains in use with an Accessible Street Hail
Livery License in New York City during the term of Grant Program Agreement.
      (2)   Grantee must maintain all equipment in the Qualified Vehicle,
including equipment necessary for wheelchair accessibility, in good working
order and must comply with all conditions and requirements of the Grant Program
Agreement.
   (b)   Accessible Street Hail Livery License.
      (1)   Grantee must continue to own the Accessible Street Hail Livery
License and to use the Accessible Street Hail Livery License with the Qualified
Vehicle purchased or retrofitted in part with Grant funds.
   (c)   Failure to Meet Requirements.
      (1)   Failure by Grantee to meet the requirements of the Grant Program
Agreement or of these Rules will result in the immediate termination by the TLC
of the Grant Program Agreement.
      (2)   Exception. Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of this subdivision,
Grantee will have ten (10) business days to comply with orders to repair or
replace the Qualified Vehicle, or as otherwise indicated in the Grant Program
Agreement
      (3)   If TLC terminates the Grant Program Agreement, Grantee must return,
as stated in the Grant Program Agreement, that portion of the Grant payment
that TLC in its sole discretion directs shall be returned on a pro rata basis
determined by the number of months the Qualified Vehicle was in service during
the term of the Grant Program Agreement.
      (4)   Grantee may terminate the Grant Program Agreement at any time
during the term of the agreement upon the repayment of the full Grant amount or
such other amount determined by TLC based on the number of months the Grantee
provided the required services.
§ 82-70 Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund Review.
   (a)   The TLC will review the Street Hail Livery Improvement Fund annually,
by no later than the end of April, beginning in 2017, to assess the adequacy of
the Fund, the uses of the Fund, and the surcharge funding the Fund receives,
and will produce a report annually with the result of its assessment and
recommendations and analysis. Such recommendations and analysis shall include
but not be limited to the following: (i) whether the current surcharge should
be lowered, raised or kept the same; (ii) a review of possible alternate
sources of funding for the Fund other than the surcharge; and (iii) the costs
incurred by Owners and Drivers that are required to purchase and operate
Accessible Vehicles as opposed to those Owners and Drivers who are not so
required. Such report shall be submitted to the Speaker of the NYC Council and
posted on TLC's website upon completion of the report.
   (b)   Drivers of Accessible Street Hail Livery Vehicles will receive
periodically, a per-trip payment for each Passenger trip while driving an
Accessible Street Hail Livery Vehicle. The per-trip payment amount will be
determined based on a review of available funds and the availability of
drivers. The per-trip payment amount will be posted on the TLC Web site.
(Amended City Record 5/14/2018, eff. 6/13/2018)
Chapter 83: Licensing and Rules for Street Hail Livery Technology System
Providers [Repealed]
§ 83-01 Scope of the Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-02 Penalties. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-03 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/
2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-04 Licensing – General Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/30/2016, eff. 7/30/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-05 Licensing – Specific Requirements. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-06 Licensing – Bond Required. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-07 Licensing – Financial Disclosure. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-08 Licensing – Fees and Term of License. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 6/15/2017, eff. 7/15/2017; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-09 Licensing – Cause for Denial. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-10 General Requirements – Unlicensed Activity. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-11 General Requirements – Compliance with Applicable Law. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-12 General Requirements – Indemnification. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-13 Business Requirements – Premises. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-14 Business Requirements – Signage. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-15 General Requirements – Unlawful Activities Prohibited. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-16 General Requirements – Notice to TLC. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-17 Business Requirements – Mailing and Email Address. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-18 Business Requirements – Change in Business Ownership. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-19 Business Requirements – Fees Charged by Licensees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-20 Business Requirements – Sale, Lease or Use of Street Hail Livery
Technology Program (LPEP). [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-21 Business Requirements – Contract with Street Hail Livery Licensee.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-22 Business Requirements – Maintenance of LPEP. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-23 Business Requirements – Compliance with LPEP Requirements and Service
Levels. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-24 Business Requirements – Credit for Performance Failures. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-25 Business Requirements – Record-Keeping and Reporting Requirements.
[Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-26 Business Requirements – Use of Personal Information and Certain
Location-Based Data. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018,
eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-27 Business Requirements – Cooperation with the Commission. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 12/15/2016, eff. 1/14/2017; repealed City Record 5/17/
2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-28 Business Requirements – Notifications to TLC of Unauthorized or Illegal
Activity. [Repealed]
(Amended City Record 9/22/2016, eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/
2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-29 Business Requirements – LPEP Provider Liability for Conduct of
Employees. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-30 Comply with Laws – Conduct Rules. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
§ 83-31 Technical Requirements – Street Hail Livery Technology System (LPEP).
[Repealed]
(Amended City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016; amended City Record 9/22/2016,
eff. 10/22/2016; repealed City Record 5/17/2018, eff. 6/16/2018)
Chapter 84: Information Security Rules for Street Hail Livery Technology System
Providers [Repealed]
§ 84-01 Scope of the Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 84-02 Definitions Specific to this Chapter. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
§ 84-03 Information Security Requirements. [Repealed]
(Repealed City Record 7/7/2016, eff. 8/6/2016)
