Chapter 5: Disclosure of Security Breach
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/045.
§ 10-501 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter,
   a.   The term "personal information" shall mean any information concerning
an individual that because of a name, number, symbol, mark or other identifier,
can be used to identify that individual.
   b.   The term "private information" shall mean either:
      (i)   personal information consisting of any information in combination
with any one or more of the following data elements, when either the data
element alone or the combination of such information plus the data element is
not encrypted, or encrypted with an encryption key that has also been accessed
or acquired:
         (1)   social security number;
         (2)   driver's license number or non-driver identification card
number;
         (3)   account number, credit or debit card number, in combination with
any required security code, access code, password or other information which
would permit access to an individual's financial account;
         (4)   account number, or credit or debit card number, if circumstances
exist wherein such number could be used to access an individual's financial
account without additional identifying information, security code, access code,
or password; or
         (5)   biometric information, meaning data generated by electronic
measurements of an individual's unique physical characteristics, such as a
retina or iris scan, fingerprint, voiceprint, or scan of hand or face geometry,
any of which is collected, retained, converted, stored or shared to identify an
individual; or
      (ii)   a user name or e-mail address in combination with a password or
security question and answer that would permit access to an online account.
   "Private information" does not include publicly available information that
is lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or local
government records.
   c.   The term "breach of security" shall mean the unauthorized access,
acquisition, disclosure or use of computerized data that compromises the
security, confidentiality or integrity of private information maintained by an
agency. Good faith or inadvertent access, acquisition, disclosure, or use of
any private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate
purposes of the agency, and good faith or legally mandated disclosure of any
private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate
purposes of the agency shall not constitute a breach of security, but in such
instances an agency must comply with the protocols issued pursuant to
subdivision i of section
10-502.
   d.   The term "consumer reporting agency" shall mean any person that, for
monetary fees, dues, or on a cooperative nonprofit basis, regularly engages in
whole or in part in the practice of assembling or evaluating consumer credit
information or other information on consumers for the purpose of furnishing
consumer reports to third parties, and uses any means or facility of interstate
commerce for the purpose of preparing or furnishing consumer reports.
(Am. L.L. 2021/151, 12/11/2021, eff. 4/10/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/045.
§ 10-502 Agency disclosure of a breach of security.
   a.   Any city agency that owns, leases, or licenses data that includes
private information shall promptly disclose to the chief privacy officer,
office of cyber command and department of information technology and
telecommunications any breach of security following discovery by a supervisor
or manager, or following notification to a supervisor or manager, of such
breach if such private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been,
accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person.
   b.   Subsequent to compliance with the provisions set forth in subdivision a
of this section, any city agency that owns, leases, or licenses data that
includes private information shall disclose, in accordance with the procedures
set forth in subdivisions d, e and f of this section, any breach of security
following discovery by a supervisor or manager, or following notification to a
supervisor or manager, of such breach to any individual whose private
information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, accessed, acquired,
disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person.
   c.   Any city agency that maintains but does not own, lease, or license data
that includes private information shall disclose any breach of security
following discovery by a supervisor or manager, or following notification to a
supervisor or manager, of such breach to the owner, lessor or licensor of the
data if the private information was, or is reasonably believed to have been,
accessed, acquired, disclosed, or used by an unauthorized person.
   d.   The disclosures required by subdivisions b and c of this section shall
be made as soon as practicable by a method reasonable under the circumstances,
provided said method is not inconsistent with the legitimate needs of law
enforcement or any other investigative or protective measures necessary to
restore the integrity of the data system. Disclosures required by subdivision b
of this section shall be made to each affected individual by at least one of
the following means:
      1.   Written notice; or
      2.   Telephonic notification, provided that a log of each such
notification is maintained by the agency that notifies the affected
individuals; or
      3.   Electronic notification, provided that the affected individual has
expressly consented to receiving such notification in electronic form and a log
of each such notification is maintained by the agency that notifies affected
individuals in such form; provided further, however, that in no case shall any
city agency, individual, or business require an individual to consent to
accepting notification in such form as a condition of establishing any
relationship or engaging in any transaction.
   e.   Should disclosure pursuant to paragraph one, two or three of
subdivision d be impracticable or inappropriate given the circumstances of the
breach and the identity of the victim, such disclosure shall be made by a
mechanism that is reasonably targeted to the individual in a manner that does
not further compromise the integrity of the private information.
   f.   In the event that five thousand or more New York residents are to be
notified at one time pursuant to this section, the agency shall also notify
consumer reporting agencies as to the timing, content and distribution of the
notices and approximate number of affected individuals. Such notice shall be
made without delaying notice to affected New York residents.
   g.   Notice to affected individuals under this section is not required if
the exposure of private information was an inadvertent disclosure by persons
authorized to access private information, and the agency reasonably determines,
in accordance with the protocols established pursuant to subdivision i of this
section, that such exposure will not likely result in misuse of such
information, or financial, personal, or reputational harm to the affected
individuals. Such a determination must be documented in writing and maintained
for at least five years.
   h.   If notice of a breach of security is made to affected individuals
pursuant to any law or rule of the state of New York, or pursuant to a law
described in paragraph b of subdivision 2 of section 208 of the state
technology law, nothing in this section shall require any additional notice to
those affected individuals, but notice still shall be provided pursuant to
subdivision a of this section.
   i.   The office of cyber command, in consultation with the chief privacy
officer and the department of information technology and telecommunications,
shall issue protocols for agency coordination and recordkeeping for any breach
of security and any incident that is not a breach of security but involves the
good faith or inadvertent access, acquisition, disclosure, or use of any
private information by an employee or agent of an agency for the legitimate
purposes of the agency. Such protocols may apply to all agencies or a subset
thereof.
   j.   Notifications made pursuant to this section may overlap with
notifications required pursuant to
chapter 12 of title 23, including the regulations, policies and protocols
issued by the chief privacy officer pursuant to such chapter. Nothing in this
section or such chapter shall require duplicate notifications, as long as any
notice provided meets any applicable requirements of both this law and such
chapter.
(Am. L.L. 2021/151, 12/11/2021, eff. 4/10/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/045.
§ 10-503 Agency disposal of private information.
An agency that discards records containing any individual's private information
shall do so in a manner intended to prevent retrieval of the information
contained therein or thereon.
(Am. L.L. 2021/151, 12/11/2021, eff. 4/10/2022)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2005/045.
§ 10-504 Agency disposal of electronics.
   a.   Any agency that disposes of electronic equipment that contains a hard
disk drive, solid state drive or similar device capable of storing information
while powered off, including but not limited to printers, copiers and
computers, shall ensure, before its disposal, the erasure of all information
contained therein, either through degaussing, physical destruction of the
drive, a data wiping that includes at least two full overwrites or another
erasure method specified by the department of information technology and
telecommunications after consultation with all relevant agencies. This
requirement shall not apply to boot related firmware.
   b.   Each agency shall require any third party who disposes of electronic
equipment on its behalf to provide the agency a written certification that the
disposal complies with the requirements set forth in this section and shall
forward such certification to the department of information technology and
telecommunications. Every two years each agency that has disposed of electronic
equipment itself shall submit a statement to the department of information
technology and telecommunications certifying that its disposal of such
electronic equipment complies with the requirements set forth in this section.
   c.   For the purposes of this section, the term "dispose" includes a
transfer of electronic equipment from one agency to another when such equipment
has stored information that is confidential or sensitive in nature and is not
relevant to the work of the agency receiving such equipment.
(L.L. 2017/011, 2/15/2017, eff. 2/15/2018)
Chapter 5: Accessibility To Public Data Sets
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011.
§ 23-501 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
   a.   "Agency" means an office, administration, department, division, bureau,
board, commission, advisory committee or other governmental entity performing a
governmental function of the city of New York.
   b.   "Data" means final versions of statistical or factual information (1)
in alphanumeric form reflected in a list, table, graph, chart or other non-
narrative form, that can be digitally transmitted or processed; and (2)
regularly created or maintained by or on behalf of and owned by an agency that
records a measurement, transaction, or determination related to the mission of
an agency. Such term shall not include information provided to an agency by
other governmental entities, nor shall it include image files, such as designs,
drawings, maps, photos, or scanned copies of original documents, provided that
it shall include statistical or factual information about such image files and
shall include geographic information system data. Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to prohibit an agency from voluntarily disclosing information not
otherwise defined as "data" in this subdivision, nor shall it be deemed to
prohibit an agency from making such voluntarily disclosed information
accessible through the single web portal established pursuant to section
23-502.
   c.   "Department" means the department of information technology and
telecommunications or any successor agency.
   d.   "Determination" means any final decision made by an agency with respect
to a person, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   eligibility for services or benefits;
      (2)   issuing a permit;
      (3)   registration, certification and licensing; and
      (4)   liability for civil and criminal penalties.
   e.   "Measurement" means to quantify by means of comparison to a reference
standard any characteristic of an observable event, occurrence or object.
   f.   "Open standard" means a technical standard developed and maintained by
a voluntary consensus standards body that is available to the public without
royalty or fee.
   g.   "Public data set" means a comprehensive collection of interrelated data
that is available for inspection by the public in accordance with any provision
of law and is maintained on a computer system by, or on behalf of, an agency.
Such term shall not include:
      (1)   any portion of such data set to which an agency may deny access
pursuant to the public officers law or any other provision of a federal or
state law, rule or regulation or local law;
      (2)   any data set that contains a significant amount of data to which an
agency may deny access pursuant to the public officers law or any other
provision of a federal or state law, rule or regulation or local law and where
removing such data would impose undue financial or administrative burden;
      (3)   data that reflects the internal deliberative process of an agency
or agencies, including but not limited to negotiating positions, future
procurements, or pending or reasonably anticipated legal or administrative
proceedings;
      (4)   data stored on an agency-owned personal computing device, or data
stored on a portion of a network that has been exclusively assigned to a single
agency employee or a single agency owned or controlled computing device;
      (5)   materials subject to copyright, patent, trademark, confidentiality
agreements or trade secret protection;
      (6)   proprietary applications, computer code, software, operating
systems or similar materials; or
      (7)   employment records, internal employee-related directories or lists,
and facilities data, information technology, internal service-desk and other
data related to internal agency administration.
   h.   "Technical standard" means (1) the common and repeated use of rules,
conditions, guidelines or characteristics for products or related processes and
production methods, and related management systems practices; and (2) (i) the
definition of terms; (ii) classification of components; (iii) delineation of
procedures; (iv) specifications of dimensions, materials, performance, designs
or operations; (v) measurement of quality and quantity in describing materials,
processes, products, systems, services or practices; (vi) test methods and
sampling procedures; or (vii) descriptions of fit and measurements of size or
strength.
   i.   "Transaction" means any interaction between an agency and any person
related to the mission of an agency.
   j.   "Voluntary consensus standards body" means a domestic or international
organization that develops and maintains a technical standard that utilizes a
transparent deliberative process, permits the participation of any party, and
achieves general consensus, although not necessarily unanimity, of the
participating parties, including a process for attempting to resolve any
differences in viewpoint.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011.
§ 23-502 Public data set availability.
   a.   Within one year of the effective date of this chapter and thereafter,
the public data sets that agencies make available on the Internet shall be
accessible through a single web portal that is linked to nyc.gov or any
successor website maintained by, or on behalf of, the city of New York. If an
agency cannot make all such public data sets available on the single web portal
pursuant to this subdivision, the agency shall report to the department and to
the council which public data set or sets that it is unable to make available,
the reasons why it cannot do so and the date by which the agency expects that
such public data set or sets will be available on the single web portal.
   b.   Such public data sets shall be made available in accordance with
technical standards published by the department pursuant to section
23-505 of this chapter and shall be in a format that permits automated
processing and shall make use of appropriate technology to notify the public of
all updates.
   c.   Such public data sets shall be updated as often as is necessary to
preserve the integrity and usefulness of the data sets to the extent that the
agency regularly maintains or updates the public data set. The department shall
preserve row data that is subject to permanent removal or replacement and shall
create and preserve archival copies, or an archival compilation data set with
data indexed to its time of preservation, of public data sets in accordance
with the technical standards manual published by the department pursuant to
section
23-505. If any public data set is available on the single web portal and
another website maintained by or on behalf of the city or a city agency, when
such public data set is updated on such city or city agency website, such
public data set shall also be updated on the single web portal within ten days
in accordance with the technical standards published by the department pursuant
to section
23-505; provided that if any such public data set receives automated updates on
such city or city agency website, such public data set shall be updated on the
single web portal within one day of any such automated update. If there is a
public data set for which such update schedule regularly cannot be met, the
agency that maintains such public data set shall report to the department the
reasons why it cannot meet such update schedule and the date by which the
agency expects that it will be able to meet such schedule, and such information
shall be disclosed in the compliance plan prepared pursuant to section
23-506.
   d.   Such public data sets shall be made available without any restrictions
on their use provided that the department may require a third party providing
to the public any public data set, or application utilizing such data set, to
explicitly identify the source and version of the public data set, and a
description of any modifications made to such public data set. Restrictions as
used in this section shall not include measures required to ensure access to
public data sets, to protect the single web site housing public data sets from
unlawful abuse or attempts to damage or impair use of the web site, or to
analyze the types of data being used to improve service delivery.
   e.   Such public data sets shall be accessible to external search
capabilities.
   f.   Agencies shall review responses to freedom of information law requests
that include the release of data to determine if such responses consist of or
include public data sets that have not yet been included on the single web
portal or the inclusion of which on the single web portal is not provided for
in the compliance plan prepared pursuant to section
23-506. Each agency shall disclose in the update to such compliance plan the
total number, since the last update, of such agency's freedom of information
law responses that included the release of data, the total number of such
responses determined to consist of or include a public data set that had not
yet been included on the single web portal and the name of such public data
set, where applicable, and the total number of such responses that resulted in
voluntarily disclosed information being made accessible through the single web
portal.
(Am. L.L. 2015/106, 11/30/2015, eff. 11/30/2016; Am. L.L. 2015/110, 11/30/2015,
eff. 11/30/2016; Am. L.L. 2016/007, 1/5/2016, eff. 1/5/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/244,
12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017; Am. L.L. 2017/251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011.
§ 23-503 Web portal administration.
   a.   The department may take reasonable measures to maintain bandwidth
availability of the web portal.
   b.   The department shall conspicuously publish the open data legal policy,
as provided in section
23-504, on the web portal.
   c.   The department shall implement an on-line forum to solicit feedback
from the public and to encourage public discussion on open data policies and
public data set availability on the web portal.
   d.   Requests received via the on-line forum for inclusion of particular
public data sets shall be considered by agencies in making determinations as to
priority for public data set inclusion on the single web portal pursuant to
paragraph 5 of subdivision b of section
23-506. The department shall provide an initial response to each such request
within two weeks of receipt. The agency to which the department refers the
request shall post its final determination as to the request on the single web
portal within two months of receipt.
(Am. L.L. 2015/109, 11/30/2015, eff. 12/30/2015)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011 and
L.L. 2015/109.
§ 23-504 Open data legal policy.
   a.   Public data sets made available on the web portal are provided for
informational purposes. The city does not warranty the completeness, accuracy,
content or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any public data set
made available on the web portal, nor are any such warranties to be implied or
inferred with respect to the public data sets furnished therein.
   b.   The city is not liable for any deficiencies in the completeness,
accuracy, content or fitness for any particular purpose or use of any public
data set, or application utilizing such data set, provided by any third party.
   c.   This chapter shall not be construed to create a private right of action
to enforce its provisions. Failure to comply with this chapter shall not result
in liability to an agency.
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011.
§ 23-505 Internet data set policy and technical standards.
   a.   Within one hundred eighty days of the effective date of this chapter,
the department shall prepare and publish a technical standards manual for the
publishing of public data sets in raw or unprocessed form through a single web
portal by city agencies for the purpose of making public data available to the
greatest number of users and for the greatest number of applications and shall,
whenever practicable, use open standards for web publishing and e-government.
Such manual shall identify the reasons why each technical standard was selected
and for which types of data it is applicable and may recommend or require that
data be published in more than one technical standard. The manual shall include
a plan to adopt or utilize a web application programming interface that permits
application programs to request and receive public data sets directly from the
web portal. The manual shall also include guidelines for the division of large
data sets into groups of smaller data sets, disaggregated by discrete time
units, when technical barriers, archival necessity or practical concerns
require such division. Such manual shall be updated by the department as
necessary.
   b.   The department shall consult with voluntary consensus standards bodies
and shall, when such participation is feasible, in the public interest and is
compatible with agency and departmental missions, authorities and priorities,
participate with such bodies in the development of technical and open
standards.
   c.   Each data set on the single web portal shall include a plain language
data dictionary; provided that for any data set available on the single web
portal before the effective date of the local law that added this subdivision,
a data dictionary shall be added to such data set no later than December 31,
2017; and provided further that for any data set made available on the single
web portal on or after the effective date of the local law that added this
subdivision and before December 31, 2017, a data dictionary shall be added to
such data set no later than thirty days after such data set is made available
on the single web portal. Such data dictionary shall provide a description for
each column heading used within the data set and shall include a description of
any acronym, technical term, unit of measure, range of possible values,
relationship between or among columns within the data set, frequency of updates
to the data set, and other information or description that can provide context
to the data, such as the method of collection, a history of modifications to
the data set format, data or methods of collection, or any other contextual
information that the agency providing the data deems relevant or the technical
standards manual requires. Such data dictionary shall be in a format and layout
to be determined by the technical standards manual. The data dictionary
accompanying each data set, or a link to such data dictionary, shall be
included directly on the single web portal. The most recent upload date and
generation date for each data set shall be included directly on the single web
portal.
   d.   The manual described in subdivision a of this section shall include a
technical standard requiring every public data set containing address
information to utilize a standard field layout and presentation of address
information and include corresponding community district and geospatial
reference data. If there is a public data set for which an agency cannot
utilize such standard field layout and presentation of address information,
such agency shall report to the department and to the council the reasons why
it cannot, and the date by which the agency expects that it will be able to
utilize such standard field layout and presentation of address information, and
such information shall be disclosed in the compliance plan prepared pursuant to
section
23-506.
   e.   Every two years, the department shall review the technical standards
manual and electronically submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council a
report of this review, including any updates pursuant to the compliance plan
required under
23-506. The department shall establish a method through which the public may
comment on the technical standards manual.
(Am. L.L. 2015/106, 11/30/2015, eff. 11/30/2016; Am. L.L. 2015/107, 11/30/2015,
eff. 3/29/2016; Am. L.L. 2015/108, 11/30/2015, eff. 11/30/2016; Am. L.L. 2017/
251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011 and
L.L. 2015/108.
§ 23-506 Agency compliance plan.
   a.   Within eighteen months of the effective date of this chapter, the
department shall submit a compliance plan to the mayor and the council and
shall make such plan available to the public on the web portal. Each agency
shall cooperate with the department in its preparation of such plan. The plan
shall include a summary description of public data sets under the control of
each agency on or after the effective date of this chapter, and shall
prioritize such public data sets for inclusion on the single web portal on or
before December 31, 2018 in accordance with the standards promulgated by the
department pursuant to section
23-505 and shall create a timeline for their inclusion on the single web
portal. If a public data set or sets cannot be made available on the single web
portal on or before December 31, 2018, the plan shall state the reasons why
such set or sets cannot be made available, and, to the extent practicable, the
date by which the agency that owns the data believes that it will be available
on the single web portal.
   b.   For purposes of prioritizing public data sets, agencies shall consider
whether information embodied in the public data set: (1) can be used to
increase agency accountability and responsiveness; (2) improves public
knowledge of the agency and its operations; (3) furthers the mission of the
agency; (4) creates economic opportunity; or (5) responds to a need or demand
identified by public consultation.
   c.   No later than September fifteen, 2018, and every September fifteen
thereafter, the department shall submit and post on the web portal an update of
the compliance plan to the mayor and the council until all public data sets
have been made available through a single web portal in compliance with this
chapter. Such update shall include the specific measures undertaken to make
public data sets available on the single web portal since the immediately
preceding update, specific measures that will be undertaken prior to the next
update, an update to the list of public data sets, if necessary, any changes to
the prioritization of public data sets and an update to the timeline for the
inclusion of data sets on the single web portal, if necessary. If a public data
set cannot be made available on the single web portal on or before December 31,
2018, the update shall state the reasons why it cannot and, to the extent
practicable, the date by which the agency believes that such public data set
will be available on the single web portal.
(Am. L.L. 2017/251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2012/011.
§ 23-507 Agency open data coordinator.
The head of each agency shall designate an employee of such agency to serve as
the open data coordinator for such agency. Such coordinator shall be
responsible for ensuring that such agency complies with the requirements of
this chapter and for receiving and responding to feedback from the public
regarding such agency's public data sets.
(L.L. 2017/251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
§ 23-508 Web portal site analytics.
The department shall collect, analyze and publish data on how users interact
with the portal established pursuant to section
23-502. Such data shall include, but need not be limited to, number of page
views, number of unique users and the location from which a user accesses such
portal. Location shall not refer to any user's internet protocol address and it
shall not include the user's personally identifying information.
(L.L. 2017/251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
§ 23-509 Status of all public data sets.
No later than September fifteen, 2018, the department shall provide, and update
in real-time, the following information on each data set classified as a public
data set on or after March 7, 2012:
   (1)   Each scheduled publication date;
   (2)   If such data set has been published, the date of such publication, the
date of the most recent update to such data set, and the current location of
the data set;
   (3)   Status of compliance with subdivision c of section
23-502 of this chapter;
   (4)   Status of compliance with subdivision c and subdivision d of section
23-505 of this chapter;
   (5)   Whether the data set is automated; and
   (6)   Whether the data set feasibly can be automated.
(L.L. 2017/251, 12/17/2017, eff. 12/17/2017)
Chapter 8: City Websites
§ 23-801 Access to translation.
Every website maintained by or on behalf of the city or a city agency shall
include a translation feature for viewing the text of that website, wherever
practicable, in languages other than English. Such translation feature shall be
indicated by a means, other than or in addition to English, that is
comprehensible to speakers of the seven most commonly spoken languages within
the city as determined by the department of city planning, which may include a
rotating language sequence.
(L.L. 2016/025, 3/14/2016, eff. 6/12/2016)
§ 23-802 Accessibility.
Editor's note: this section has been amended by L.L._2025/187,_12/25/2025,_eff.
6/23/2026.
   a.   The mayor or the mayor's designee shall adopt a protocol for websites
maintained by or on behalf of the city or a city agency relating to website
accessibility for persons with disabilities. Such protocol shall provide for
agency websites to use either of the following standards: 36 CFR § 1194.22 or
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Level AA, developed by the
Worldwide Web Consortium, or any successor standards, provided that the adopted
protocol may differ from these standards in specific instances when the mayor
or mayor's designee determines, after consulting with experts in website design
and reasonable accommodations for people with disabilities, and the holding of
a public hearing, that such differences will provide effective communication
for people with disabilities, and that such differences are documented in such
protocol. Such protocol shall be made available online. This section does not
require an agency to take any action that would result in a fundamental
alteration in the nature of a service, program, or activity or in undue
financial and administrative burdens.
   b.   No later than July 1, 2017, and every two years thereafter, the mayor
or the mayor's designee shall submit to the council a written report that
documents the compliance of websites maintained by or on behalf of the city or
a city agency with the protocol adopted pursuant to subdivision a of this
section.
(L.L. 2016/026, 3/14/2016, eff. 9/10/2016)
§ 23-803 Online interactive map.
The department of environmental protection shall provide to the public, at no
charge, on the city's website, an online interactive map pursuant to section
24-309.1. All information required by section
24-309.1 shall be available on the city's website on or before June 1, 2019 and
updated, at minimum, in June of each year. The mayor shall ensure that agencies
provide such department with assistance and information as it requires to
compile and update the interactive map.
(L.L. 2019/065, 4/14/2019, eff. 4/14/2019)
§ 23-804 Open space coordination platform.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Art and cultural institutions. The term "art and cultural institutions"
means not-for-profit art and cultural groups, organizations, venues or
institutions within the city of New York.
      Office. The term "office" means the mayor's office of citywide event
coordination and management established pursuant to executive order number 105,
dated September 17, 2007, or another office or agency designated by the mayor.
      Open space. The term "open space" means a roadway space, park space, or
another public outdoor location, including but not limited to a pedestrian
plaza or public parking lot, that is made available by the office for use by
art and cultural institutions for outdoor performances or as a rehearsal space.
   b.   Website for coordinating the use of open space for art and cultural
programming. The office shall, in consultation with any other relevant agency
or office, including but not limited to the department of cultural affairs, the
department of parks and recreation, and the department of information
technology and telecommunications, create a website that:
      1.   Provides information about open space;
      2.   Facilitates the use of open space by art and cultural institutions;
      3.   Allows users to search for open space, by location and on a map; and
      4.   Allows users to search for information about outdoor programs
offered by art and cultural institutions that are coordinated by the office.
Such website may also provide information about other events hosted by art and
cultural institutions and outdoor events held on private property, to the
extent such information is provided to the office for inclusion on such
website.
(L.L. 2021/007, 1/10/2021, eff. 4/10/2021)
§ 23-805 Website encryption.
Every website maintained by or on behalf of the city or a city agency shall
encrypt all exchanges and transfers between a web server, maintained by or on
behalf of the city or a city agency, and a web browser: (i) of hypertext; or
(ii) of electronic information, and require web browsers to request such
encrypted exchange or transfer at all times for such websites, provided that
such encryption shall not be required if such exchanges or transfers are
conducted in a manner that provides at least an equivalent level of
confidentiality, data integrity and authentication.
(L.L. 2020/079, 8/28/2020, eff. 2/28/2020)
§ 23-806 Online payment grace period.
   a.   For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Electronic system. The term "electronic system" means any website,
network, online infrastructure or internally or externally accessible
electronic systems constructed or maintained by or on behalf of the city.
      Electronic system failure. The term "electronic system failure" means a
malfunction, or unauthorized denial of service, in an electronic system that
makes it impossible for one or more persons to make payments to a city agency.
   b.   In the event that an electronic system failure disables, for 24 hours
or more, an electronic system used by persons to make payments to an agency,
such affected agency shall establish a 48-hour grace period after such system
is restored, during which no late payment fees or interest will be incurred for
any payment due in the time period during which such electronic system failure
disabled such system, provided that if only certain persons owing payments to
such affected agency are unable to make such payments due to an electronic
system failure, such affected agency shall allow such persons to file claims to
forgive late payment fees and interest accrued during such electronic system
failure. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require such affected
agency to establish a grace period in addition to any grace period separately
required by law or rule unless an electronic system failure extends to or
beyond the end of such separately required grace period.
   c.   When an agency is required to establish a 48-hour grace period pursuant
to this section, the agency head shall have the discretion to extend such grace
period to a period not exceeding seven days; provided that for mayoral agencies
such discretion shall be exercised by the mayor; and further provided that for
boards and commissions such discretion shall be exercised by the chair of such
board or commission.
(L.L. 2021/106, 10/10/2021, eff. 2/7/2022)
§ 23-807 List of wheelchair repair providers.
   a.   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms have the
following meanings:
      Office. The term “office” means the office established under executive
order number 73 for the year 2021 or any successor office or agency that
carries out the same or substantially similar functions.
      Wheelchair repair provider. The term “wheelchair repair provider” means a
person that repairs a wheelchair in return for payment or free of charge.
   b.   The office shall post on its website a list of wheelchair repair
providers that operate in the city. The office may compile such list based on
information from other agencies about persons in the city that provide services
or sell or lease products for persons with disabilities. The office shall
update such list no less than once each year. Where practicable, such list
shall include the following information for each wheelchair repair provider:
      1.   Name;
      2.   Address;
      3.   Email address;
      4.   Phone number;
      5.   Website domain name;
      6.   Hours of operation;
      7.   Insurance providers accepted, if any; and
      8.   Forms of payment accepted.
   c.   The department of health and mental hygiene shall post on its website a
link to the list the office creates pursuant to subdivision b.
   d.   The 311 customer service center shall provide, in response to a request
from the public for information regarding how to locate wheelchair repair
providers, a link to the list the office posts pursuant to subdivision b.
(L.L. 2025/194, 12/25/2025, eff. 6/23/2026)
Chapter 12: Identifying Information
§ 23-1201 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms have the following meanings:
   Chief privacy officer. The term "chief privacy officer" means the person
designated by the mayor pursuant to subdivision h of section 8 of the charter
to act as the city's chief privacy officer, or their designee.
   Contracting agency. The term "contracting agency" means a city, county,
borough, or other office, position, administration, department, division,
bureau, board or commission, or a corporation, institution, or agency of
government, the expenses of which are paid in whole or in part from the city
treasury.
   Contractor. The term "contractor" means a person who is a party to a
contract with a contracting agency to provide human services, or other services
designated in policies and protocols of the chief privacy officer.
   Employee. The term "employee" means any officer or other person whose salary
or wages are paid by a city agency.
   Human services. The term "human services" has the meaning set forth in
subdivision c of section
6-129.
   Identifying information. The term "identifying information" means any
information obtained by or on behalf of the city that may be used on its own or
with other information to identify or locate an individual, including, but not
limited to: name, sexual orientation, gender identity, race, marital or
partnership status, status as a victim of domestic violence or sexual assault,
status as a crime victim or witness, citizenship or immigration status,
eligibility for or receipt of public assistance or city services, all
information obtained from an individual's income tax records, information
obtained from any surveillance system operated by, for the benefit of, or at
the direction of the police department, motor vehicle information or license
plate number, biometrics such as fingerprints and photographs, height, weight,
languages spoken, religion, nationality, country of origin, place of birth,
arrest record or criminal conviction, employment status, employer information,
current and previous home and work addresses, contact information such as phone
number and email address, information concerning social media accounts, date
and/or time of release from the custody of the administration for children's
services, the department of correction, or the police department, any scheduled
court appearances, or any scheduled appointments with any employee, contractor,
or subcontractor.
   Privacy officer. The term "privacy officer" means the person designated by
the head of each city agency to act as such agency's privacy officer. Where a
disclosure of identifying information is in response to a request pursuant to
the state freedom of information law, city agencies' freedom of information law
officers may perform the functions otherwise performed by the privacy officer
with respect to such request.
   Routine collection or disclosure. The term "routine collection or
disclosure" means the collection or disclosure of identifying information that
is made during the normal course of city agency business and furthers the
purpose or mission of such agency. Routine collection or disclosure also
includes the collection or disclosure of identifying information that occurs
between agencies of the city when the privacy officers of the collecting agency
and the disclosing agency agree that the collection or disclosure furthers the
purpose or mission of their respective agencies.
   Subcontractor. The term "subcontractor" means a person who is a party to a
contract with a contractor to provide human services, or other services
designated in policies and protocols of the chief privacy officer.
   Third party. The term "third party" means any person other than: (i)
personnel of the city, the department of education, or a local public benefit
corporation or local public authority, or (ii) personnel of a contractor or
subcontractor where such contractor or subcontractor is authorized to possess
the relevant identifying information.
(L.L. 2017/247, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018; Am. L.L. 2023/061, 5/26/2023, eff.
11/22/2023)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/247.
§ 23-1202 Collection, retention and disclosure of identifying information.
   a.   Employees, contractors, and subcontractors shall collect, retain, and
disclose identifying information only in accordance with this chapter.
   b.   Collection. 
      1.   Absent exigent circumstances, no employee shall collect identifying
information without the written approval of the privacy officer of such
employee's agency. In addition, such collection shall not be allowed unless it:
         (a)   furthers the purpose or mission of such city agency; or
         (b)   is required by law or treaty.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 1 of this subdivision:
         (a)   the privacy officer of an employee's agency may approve in
advance certain routine collections of identifying information;
         (b)   the chief privacy officer may approve in advance a collection of
identifying information not otherwise authorized by paragraph 1 of this
subdivision upon the determination that such collection is in the best
interests of the city; and
         (c)   the provisions of paragraph 1 of this subdivision do not apply:
            (1)   to any collection of identifying information by or to the
police department in connection with an investigation of a crime that has been
committed or credible information about an attempted or impending crime, or
            (2)   where the collection is in connection with an open
investigation by a city agency concerning the welfare of a minor or an
individual who is otherwise not legally competent.
         Any such collections shall not require any additional approval by the
privacy officer or chief privacy officer.
   c.   Disclosure. 
      1.   Absent exigent circumstances, no employee shall disclose identifying
information to any party outside such employee's agency, including an employee
of another city agency, without the written approval of the privacy officer of
such agency. In addition, such disclosure shall not be allowed unless it:
         (a)   has been authorized in writing by the individual to whom such
information pertains or, if such individual is a minor or is otherwise not
legally competent, by such individual's parent, legal guardian, or other person
with legal authority to consent on behalf of the individual;
         (b)   furthers the purpose or mission of such city agency; or
         (c)   is required by law or treaty.
      2.   Notwithstanding the provisions of this subdivision:
         (a)   the privacy officer of an employee's agency may approve in
advance certain routine disclosures of identifying information;
         (b)   the chief privacy officer may approve in advance a disclosure to
another city agency or agencies not otherwise authorized by paragraph 1 of this
subdivision upon the determination that such disclosure is in the best
interests of the city; and
         (c)   the provisions of paragraph 1 of this subdivision do not apply:
            (1)   to any disclosure of identifying information by or to the
police department in connection with an investigation of a crime that has been
committed or credible information about an attempted or impending crime, or
            (2)   where the disclosure is in connection with an open
investigation by a city agency concerning the welfare of a minor or an
individual who is otherwise not legally competent.
         Any such disclosure shall not require any additional approval by the
privacy officer or chief privacy officer.
      3.   Any request for identifying information or a proposal for the
unsolicited disclosure of identifying information by an employee that does not
concern a routine disclosure shall be sent to the privacy officer of such
employee's agency as soon as practicable.
      4.   If an individual's identifying information is disclosed in violation
of this chapter, the privacy officer of such employee's agency that becomes
aware of such disclosure shall notify the chief privacy officer as soon as
practicable and, if such disclosure is one described in policies and protocols
issued pursuant to subdivision 6 of section
23-1203, the agency responsible for the disclosure shall make reasonable
efforts to notify such individual in writing of the identifying information
disclosed and to whom it was disclosed as soon as practicable; provided,
however, that this paragraph shall not require any notification that would
violate the provisions of subdivision e of section
23-1204. The chief privacy officer shall submit a quarterly report containing
an anonymized compilation or summary of such disclosures to the speaker of the
council and shall make such report available online. Such report may be
combined with the report required by subdivision d of this section.
   d.   Exigent circumstances. 
      1.   In the event identifying information is collected or disclosed under
exigent circumstances, information about such collection or request and
disclosure, along with an explanation of why such exigent circumstances
existed, shall be sent to the chief privacy officer as soon as practicable
after such collection or disclosure. This subdivision shall not require any
such notification where:
         (a)   the collection or disclosure is by or to the police department
in connection with an open investigation of criminal activity;
         (b)   the collection or disclosure is in connection with an open
investigation concerning the welfare of a minor or an individual who is
otherwise not legally competent; or
         (c)   the collection or disclosure is by or to an employee acting in
furtherance of law enforcement or public health or safety powers of such
employee's agency under exigent circumstances and such collections or
disclosures occur during the normal course of such agency's business.
      2.   The chief privacy officer shall submit a quarterly report containing
an anonymized compilation or summary of such disclosures to the speaker of the
council and make such report available online.
   e.   Retention. A city agency shall retain identifying information where
required by law. In addition, a city agency may retain identifying information
to further the purpose or mission of such city agency, or when retention is in
the interest of the city and is not contrary to the purpose or mission of such
agency. This subdivision shall not prohibit a city agency from retaining
aggregate demographic information that is anonymized.
   f.   Agency policies and protocols. Each city agency, acting in accordance
with the policies and protocols of the chief privacy officer, may issue
additional agency-specific guidance in furtherance of this chapter, including
the policies and protocols promulgated pursuant to section
23-1203.
   g.   Contractors and subcontractors. Each city agency shall require
contractors that obtain identifying information, whether directly or through
subcontractors, to apply the requirements of subdivisions b, c, d, and e of
this section and any applicable policies and protocols adopted pursuant to this
chapter; provided, however, that the duties of the privacy officer may be
exercised by such contractors and subcontractors by designation of the agency.
   h.   Private right of action. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
create a private right of action to enforce any provision of such chapter.
   i.   Construction. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit city officers and
employees from performing their duties in accordance with federal, state, and
local law.
(L.L. 2017/247, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/247.
§ 23-1203 Policies and protocols of the chief privacy officer.
The policies and protocols promulgated by the chief privacy officer pursuant to
subdivision h of section 8 of the charter shall, at a minimum:
   1.   require that identifying information is anonymized where appropriate in
accordance with the purpose or mission of a city agency;
   2.   require the privacy officer of each city agency to issue guidance to
city agency employees, contractors and subcontractors regarding such agency's
collection, retention, and disclosure of identifying information;
   3.   require any city agency disclosing identifying information to a third
party when such a disclosure is not classified as routine pursuant to section
23-1202 to enter into an agreement ensuring that the anticipated use and any
potential future use of such information by such third party occurs only in a
manner consistent with this chapter unless: (i) such disclosure is made under
exigent circumstances, or (ii) such an agreement would not further the purposes
of this chapter due to the absence of circumstances in which such disclosure
would unduly compromise an important privacy interest.
   4.   describe disclosures of identifying information to third parties when
such a disclosure is classified as routine pursuant to section
23-1202 for which, because of the nature or extent of such disclosures or
because of the nature of the relationship between the city agency and third
party, such disclosing agency is required to enter into an agreement with such
third party requiring that the anticipated use and any potential future use of
such information by such third party occurs only in a manner consistent with
this chapter;
   5.   describe disclosures of identifying information that are not to be
treated as routine pursuant to section
23-1202, as determined by the nature and extent of such disclosures, and
require an additional level of review and approval by the privacy officer of
such agency or the contractor or subcontractor before such disclosures are
made;
   6.   describe circumstances when disclosure of an individual's identifying
information to third parties in violation of this chapter would, in light of
the nature, extent, and foreseeable adverse consequences of such disclosure,
require the disclosing city agency, contractor, or subcontractor to make
reasonable efforts to notify the affected individual as soon as practicable;
   7.   establish standard contract provisions, or required elements of such
provisions, related to the protection of identifying information;
   8.   require the privacy officer of each city agency to arrange for
dissemination of information to agency employees, contractors, and
subcontractors and develop a plan for compliance with this chapter and any
policies and protocols developed under this chapter; and
   9.   establish a mechanism for accepting and investigating complaints for
violations of this chapter.
(L.L. 2017/245, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/245.
§ 23-1204 Committee.
   a.   There is hereby established in the office of the mayor, or such other
city agency headed by a mayoral appointee as the mayor may determine, an
identifying information protection committee.
      1.   Such committee shall consist of:
         (a)   the corporation counsel or a designee of the corporation
counsel;
         (b)   the director of the mayor's office of operations or such
director's designee;
         (c)   the coordinator of criminal justice or such coordinator's
designee;
         (d)   any deputy mayors who may be designated by the mayor to serve on
such committee or their designees; and
         (e)   the commissioners of the following agencies or such
commissioners' designees:
            (1)   the administration for children's services;
            (2)   the department of social services;
            (3)   the police department;
            (4)   the department of correction;
            (5)   the department of probation;
            (6)   the department of health and mental hygiene;
            (7)   the department of information technology and
telecommunications;
            (8)   the fire department; and
            (9)   representatives of such other agencies as the mayor may
designate having relevant duties or expertise with respect to federal, state,
and local laws and policies relating to protecting identifying information.
      2.   Unless otherwise determined by the mayor, the chair of such
committee shall be the director of the mayor's office of operations or such
director's designee. Staff services for such committee shall be provided by the
participating agencies.
   b.   The committee, in collaboration with the chief privacy officer, shall
review city agency reports provided pursuant to section
23-1205 and recommend policies and procedures regarding the collection,
retention and disclosure of identifying information while taking into
consideration each city agency's unique mission, subject matter expertise, and
legal obligations.
   c.   No later than October 30, 2018, the committee shall communicate its
final recommendations pursuant to subdivision b of this section along with the
city agency reports required pursuant to section
23-1205 to the applicable city agencies, the mayor, the speaker of the council,
and the chief privacy officer. Beginning July 31, 2020 and every two years
thereafter, the committee shall review such agency reports and any policies and
protocols adopted pursuant to this chapter.
   d.   Within 90 days of receiving any final recommendations of the committee,
the chief privacy officer shall adopt policies and protocols, in accordance
with sections
23-1202 and
23-1203, as necessary or appropriate in furtherance of this chapter.
   e.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported or disclosed
pursuant to this section shall be reported or disclosed in a manner that would
violate any applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to
the privacy of information or that would interfere with a law enforcement
investigation or other investigative activity by an agency or would compromise
public safety.
(L.L. 2017/245, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/245.
§ 23-1205 City agency policies.
   a.   No later than July 31, 2018, and every two years thereafter by July 31,
each city agency shall provide a report regarding the collection, retention,
and disclosure of identifying information by such agency and any contractors or
subcontractors utilized by such agency. Each such report shall include:
      1.   information concerning identifying information collected, retained,
and disclosed, including:
         (a)   the types of identifying information collected, retained, and
disclosed, including, but not limited to, where practicable, those types
enumerated in the definition of identifying information;
         (b)   the types of collections and disclosures classified as routine
and any collections or disclosures approved by the chief privacy officer;
         (c)   current policies regarding collection, retention, and
disclosure, including:
            (1)   policies regarding requests for disclosures from other city
agencies, local public authorities or local public benefit corporations, and
third parties;
            (2)   policies regarding proposals for disclosures to other city
agencies, local public authorities or local public benefit corporations, and
third parties;
            (3)   policies regarding the classification of disclosures as
necessitated by the existence of exigent circumstances or as routine; and
            (4)   which divisions and categories of employees within an agency
make disclosures of identifying information following the approval of the
privacy officer;
         (d)   use of agreements regarding the anticipated use and any
potential future use of identifying information disclosed;
         (e)   types of entities requesting the disclosure of identifying
information or proposals for disclosures of identifying information, the
reasons why an agency discloses identifying information in response to requests
or proposes the disclosure of identifying information, and why any such
disclosures furthers the purpose or mission of such agency; and
         (f)   the reasons why any collection and retention of identifying
information furthers the purposes or mission of such agency;
      2.   the impact of any privacy policies and protocols issued by the chief
privacy officer, any guidance issued by the privacy officer of such agency or
the committee, the provisions of this chapter, and other applicable law on the
agency's collection, retention, and disclosure of identifying information;
      3.   consideration and implementation, where applicable, of alternative
policies that minimize the collection, retention, and disclosure of identifying
information to the greatest extent possible while furthering the purpose or
mission of such agency; and
      4.   policies on access to identifying information by employees,
contractors, and subcontractors, including consideration of the necessity of
access to such information for the performance of their duties and
implementation of policies that minimize such access to the greatest extent
possible while furthering the purpose or mission of an agency.
   b.   Each city agency shall submit the report prepared pursuant to
subdivision a of this section to the mayor, the speaker of the council, the
chief privacy officer, and the committee.
   c.   No information that is otherwise required to be reported or disclosed
pursuant to this section shall be reported or disclosed in a manner that would
violate any applicable provision of federal, state, or local law relating to
the privacy of information or that would interfere with a law enforcement
investigation or other investigative activity by an agency or would compromise
public safety.
(L.L. 2017/245, 12/17/2017, eff. 6/15/2018)
Editor's note: For related unconsolidated provisions, see Appendix A at
L.L. 2017/245.
