**Identified Datasets for the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene**

1.  **Violation and Penalty Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "Failure to comply with the provisions adopted by the department pursuant to this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both." (§ 17-104.b)
    *   "Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both." (§ 17-107.c)
    *   "Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both." (§ 17-108.d)
    *   "Any person who violates the provisions of this section, or the regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to five hundred dollars or imprisonment for up to six months or both. In addition, any violation of this section shall constitute a civil violation subject to a penalty of not more than five hundred dollars per violation." (§ 17-123.d)
    *   "Every person, corporation, or body that shall violate or not conform to any provisions of the health code of the city of New York, or any rule or sanitary regulation duly made, shall be liable to pay a penalty not exceeding the maximum amount allowed by the health code of the city of New York, or any other applicable law, rule or regulation." (§ 17-133)
    *   "Every person, corporation, or body that shall violate or not conform to any provisions of the health code of the city of New York or any applicable law, rule or regulation pertaining to the eradication of rodents, the elimination of rodent harborages or other rodent related nuisances shall be liable to pay a civil penalty of not less than three hundred dollars for the first violation." (§ 17-133.1)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated thereunder in a manner that does not present an imminent health hazard or public health hazard... shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500; except that such food service establishment shall not be subject to a civil penalty for a first-time violation if such food service establishment proves to the satisfaction of the department, within seven days of the issuance of the notice of violation and prior to the commencement of an adjudication of the violation, that the violation has been cured." (§ 17-144.b)
    *   "The department, in case it has incurred any expense, or has rendered service for which payment is due, and as the rules of the department may provide, may institute and maintain a suit against any one liable for such expenses, or against any person, firm, or corporation, owing or who may owe such rent or compensation, and may recover the expenses so incurred under any such order." (§ 17-150)
    *   "Whenever the expenses attending the execution of any order of the department may be made the subject of a suit by it, there may be joined in the same suit a claim or claims for any penalty or penalties for violation of any health provisions, or for the violation or omission to perform or obey such order, or any prior order of the department, or for the not doing of that, or any portion of that, for the doing of which such expenses arose or were incurred; and the proper joint or several judgment may be had against one or more of the defendants in the suit, as they or either of them may be liable in respect of both such claims, or either or any of them." (§ 17-153.c)
    *   "Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars, or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both." (§ 17-165.c)
    *   "Any violation of the provisions of this section or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder, shall be prosecuted as a civil violation subject to a penalty of a sum ranging from zero to not more than one hundred dollars." (§ 17-173.d)
    *   "Any person who violates the provisions of this section, or any of the rules promulgated thereunder, shall, for a first offense, be guilty of a violation punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars, provided that such person shall be issued a written warning instead of such fine for such first offense where such animal was not injured as a result of being restrained in violation of this section." (§ 17-197.c)
    *   "Any person who violates subdivision b of this section or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each violation recoverable in a proceeding before any tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or within any agency of the city of New York designated to conduct such proceedings; except that for a first such violation and other violations of subdivision b occurring on the same day, such person shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000 for each violation recoverable in a proceeding before any such tribunal." (§ 17-197.1.e)
    *   "Any owner of a building who violates subdivisions b or c of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not less than $200 and not to exceed $2,000 for each violation. Any owner of a building who violates subdivision d of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $250 for each violation. Any owner of a building who violates subdivision g of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not less than $200 and not to exceed $2,000 for each violation." (§ 17-194.j)
    *   "Any owner of a building who violates any provision of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $2,000 for a first violation, and not more than $5,000 for a second or subsequent violation, except that such owner shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $10,000 for any violation that is accompanied by or results in a fatality or serious injury." (§ 17-194.1.i.2.i)
    *   "Any food service establishment that violates subdivision c of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for each violation." (§ 17-195.e)
    *   "Any internet-based food delivery service provider that violates subdivision b of this section or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed one hundred dollars for each violation." (§ 17-195.1.c)
    *   "Any responsible person who violates any rules promulgated pursuant to this section shall be liable to pay a penalty as provided by the health code of the city of New York, the administrative code of the city of New York or any other applicable law, rule or regulation." (§ 17-196.g)
    *   "Any person who violates the provisions of subdivision a, b, or c of section 17-307 of this subchapter shall be guilty of a violation, punishable by a fine of not less than $150 nor more than $250." (§ 17-325.a)
    *   "In addition to the penalties prescribed by subdivision a of this section, any person who violates, or any person aiding another to violate, the provisions of subdivision a, b, or c of section 17-307 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 together with a penalty of $100 per day for every day during which the unlicensed business operated..." (§ 17-325.b.1)
    *   "Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or not less than one hundred dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding fifteen days, or both." (§ 17-332.a)
    *   "In lieu of criminal prosecution, any violation of this subchapter or any of the rules promulgated hereunder may be prosecuted as civil violations subject to a civil penalty of not less than twenty-five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by the suspension or revocation of a license and the suspension from work of the horse with respect to which the act caused the violation was committed or by both such civil penalty and suspension." (§ 17-332.b)
    *   "Any person who violates any provision of this subchapter or any of the regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or not less than five hundred nor more than five thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than one year, or both." (§ 17-350.a)
    *   "In addition to any other penalty imposed by any other provision of law or rule promulgated thereunder, any person found to be in violation of this subchapter or any of the rules promulgated hereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than three hundred dollars for the first violation; not more than five hundred dollars for the second violation within a two-year period; and not more than one thousand dollars for the third and all subsequent violations within a two-year period." (§ 17-362.b)
    *   "Any owner or operator of a boarding kennel, business or establishment that violates any provision of this subchapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of two hundred and fifty dollars for each violation." (§ 17-370)
    *   "Any person found in violation of any provision of this subchapter, other than subdivision b of section 17-377, or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of five hundred dollars per day for each such violation." (§ 17-381.a)
    *   "Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable and responsible for a penalty of not more than one thousand dollars to be recovered in a civil action but in the name of the city in any court of record in the city." (§ 17-408.a)
    *   "Every person who violates subdivisions a or b of this section shall, for a first violation thereof, be liable for a civil penalty of not less than two hundred dollars nor more than four hundred dollars; for a second violation, both of which were committed within a period of twelve months, be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars nor more than one thousand dollars; and for a third or subsequent violation, all of which were committed within a period of twelve months, be liable for a civil penalty of not less than one thousand dollars nor more than two thousand dollars." (§ 17-508.e.1)
    *   "Every person who violates subdivision d of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty of one hundred dollars for each violation, except that every person who violates subdivision d of this section by smoking, or using an electronic cigarette, in a pedestrian plaza as prohibited by paragraph seven of subdivision c of section 17-503 or in a park or other property under the jurisdiction of the department of parks and recreation as prohibited by paragraph three of subdivision d of section 17-503 shall be liable for a civil penalty of fifty dollars for each violation." (§ 17-508.e.3)
    *   "Any person found to be in violation of section 17-703 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars for the first violation, and not more than five thousand dollars for each additional violation found on that day; and not more than ten thousand dollars for the second violation and each subsequent violation by that person." (§ 17-710.a.1)
    *   "Any person who violates subdivision a of section 17-715 shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than one thousand dollars for the first violation, and not more than one thousand dollars for each additional violation found on that day; and not more than two thousand dollars for the second violation at the same place of business within a three-year period, and not more than two thousand dollars for each additional violation found on that day; and not more than five thousand dollars for the third and all subsequent violations at the same place of business within a three-year period." (§ 17-716.a)
    *   "Any person found to be in violation of subdivision (b), (c) or (d) of section 17-804, section 17-814, or section 17-815 of this chapter or any of the rules promulgated thereunder shall be liable for a civil penalty of five hundred dollars for each violation." (§ 17-806)
    *   "Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder, shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500 per day for each such violation." (§ 17-1707)
    *   "Any person who is found to violate any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $500 and not more than $2,000 for each violation." (§ 17-1903.a)
    *   "Any person found in violation of section 17-1603 or 17-1604 or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by incarceration for not more than one year or a fine of up to one thousand dollars, or both." (§ 17-1607.a)
    *   "Any person found to be in violation of section 17-1402 or 17-1403 of this chapter or rules of the department promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than five hundred dollars for each violation. Any person found to be in violation of section 17-1405 or 17-1407 of this chapter or rules of the department promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than two hundred fifty dollars for each violation." (§ 17-1409)
    *   "Any child care service found in violation of section 17-1303 or any provision of any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500 for each such violation." (§ 17-1307.a)
    *   "Any person providing a commercial lawn application who violates any provision of subdivision b of section 17-1102 of this chapter or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed five thousand dollars for a first violation, and not to exceed ten thousand dollars for a subsequent offense." (§ 17-1104.a.1)
    *   "Any food service establishment that violates subdivision a of this section, or any rules promulgated pursuant to this section, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $200..." (§ 17-1507.c)
    *   "A food service establishment that fails to display or conspicuously display a grade card or grade pending card in violation of subdivision a of this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $500." (§ 17-1508.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates subdivision a of this section or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of $400." (§ 17-1509.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this subdivision or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to the following penalties: for one or two such employees observed without hair coverings, $100; for three such employees observed without hair coverings, $125; and for four or more such employees observed without hair coverings, $150; except that there shall be a civil penalty of $0 imposed upon a food service establishment for a first-time violation of this subdivision or any rule or regulation issued thereunder." (§ 17-1510.a.2)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1511.c)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a civil penalty of $200." (§ 17-1512.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant thereto shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1513.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1514.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1515.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1516.b)
    *   "A food service establishment that violates this section or any rule promulgated pursuant to this section shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100..." (§ 17-1517.b)

    **Why:** Tracking all violations and associated penalties is crucial for enforcement, compliance monitoring, and financial oversight across all regulated activities.

    **One row represents:** A single violation incident or penalty assessment.

    **Covers:** All civil and criminal violations and penalties issued by the DOHMH or its designated enforcement agencies across all regulated activities and programs.

    **Columns:**
    *   Violation ID
    *   Date of Violation
    *   Time of Violation
    *   Location ID (e.g., Building ID, Business ID, Vehicle ID, Premises Address)
    *   Violation Type (e.g., Sanitary, Licensing, Environmental, Animal Welfare, Tobacco, Lead, etc.)
    *   Specific Code/Rule Violated
    *   Description of Violation
    *   Enforcing Officer/Inspector ID
    *   Enforcing Agency
    *   Respondent/Violator ID (e.g., Person ID, Business ID)
    *   Penalty Amount Assessed
    *   Penalty Status (e.g., Issued, Paid, Contested, Reduced, Waived, Outstanding)
    *   Date Penalty Due
    *   Date Penalty Paid
    *   Adjudication Outcome (e.g., Guilty, Not Guilty, Dismissed, Cured)
    *   Date of Adjudication
    *   Associated Order ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 2)
    *   Associated License/Permit ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 3)
    *   Cure Period Offered (Yes/No)
    *   Cure Date (if applicable)
    *   First-Time Violation (Yes/No)
    *   Repeat Violation Count (for same offense within specified period)
    *   Misdemeanor (Yes/No)
    *   Imprisonment Term (if applicable)

2.  **Inspection Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "Any officer or employee of the department may visit any person who shall be reported to the department as being apparently or presumably sick of any communicable disease and report his or her opinion of such sickness to it in writing." (§ 17-106)
    *   "An officer or employee of the department shall visit and inspect all vessels coming to the wharves, landing places, or shores of the city, or within three hundred yards thereof, which are suspected of having on board any communicable disease, or of being likely to communicate such disease to the inhabitants of the city." (§ 17-107.a)
    *   "The powers of the department shall include the ordering and enforcing in the same manner as other orders are provided to be enforced, the repairs of buildings, houses and other structures; the regulation and control of all public markets in relation to the cleanliness, ventilation and drainage thereof and the prevention of sale or offering for sale of improper articles; the removal of any obstruction, matter or thing in or upon the public streets, sidewalks or places, which, in the opinion of the department, may lead to conditions dangerous to life or health; the prevention of accidents by which life or health may be endangered; and generally the abatement of all nuisances." (§ 17-113.a)
    *   "An officer or employee of the department shall visit and inspect all stores and places within the city which are suspected of containing putrid or unsound provisions or other articles unfit for human consumption or use or likely to communicate disease to the inhabitants, and make and sign a report in writing stating the stores, places and articles so inspected and the nature, state and situation thereof and such officer's or employee's opinion in relation thereto." (§ 17-165.a)
    *   "Within 14 days of receipt of a covered complaint, the department shall make its best effort to inspect the building to which such complaint pertains for signs of rat activity or conditions that attract rats, unless the department has inspected such building for the same within 90 days of the submission of such complaint or the department is otherwise currently engaged in pest control activities at the location of such building." (§ 17-133.4.b)
    *   "During an inspection, the department shall record the following information: 1. The date of the inspection; 2. The street address of the building so inspected; 3. Whether such building passed or failed such inspection, as determined by the department; 4. If any notice of violation relating to the presence of rats or order to abate a condition related to the presence of rats is issued to the person in charge of such building in response to such inspection, the number of such notices of violation or orders to abate so issued; and 5. The inspector’s observations of signs of rats or conditions that attract rats during such inspection or any subsequent inspection." (§ 17-133.4.b)
    *   "Each person issued a food vendor license or a permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place shall: a. Permit regular inspections by the department of any vehicle or pushcart used in the operation of his or her business, any premises under his or her control in which food intended to be sold or offered for sale by him or her as a food vendor is prepared, processed or stored and present such vehicle or pushcart for inspection at such place and time as may be designated by the department;" (§ 17-314.a)
    *   "The department shall establish and implement a system for grading and classifying inspection results for each vending vehicle or pushcart using letters to identify and represent a vending vehicle or pushcart's degree of compliance with laws and rules that require such vending vehicle and pushcart to operate in a sanitary manner to protect public health." (§ 17-325.3)
    *   "Stables in which horses used in a rental horse business are kept shall be open for inspection by authorized officers, veterinarians and employees of the department, and any persons designated by the commissioner to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, agents of the ASPCA, police officers, and employees of the department of consumer and worker protection." (§ 17-330.j)
    *   "The department shall conduct an inspection of the records of each boarding kennel, business or establishment to determine such facility's compliance with the provisions of this subchapter." (§ 17-368)
    *   "The acceptance of an application and fee for a new permit or the renewal of a permit shall not preclude the commissioner from taking any action that he or she deems necessary, including, but not limited to, the denial of a new permit or renewal permit if department or other investigatory or pre-permit inspections disclose conditions or circumstances indicating that a permit should not be issued or renewed." (§ 17-373.h)
    *   "The department shall, subject to the approval of the board of health, develop an electronic death registration system. Such electronic death registration system shall include an internet based electronic method of collecting, storing, recording, transmitting, amending and authenticating information necessary to complete a death registration." (§ 17-196.b)
    *   "In addition to or as part of any investigation required pursuant to section 27-2056.14, whenever a report has been made to the department of a person under 18 years of age with an elevated blood lead level that is at or above the blood lead reference level established pursuant to this subchapter, the department shall conduct such investigation as may be necessary to identify potential sources of such elevated blood lead level, including, but not limited to, inspecting the following areas: 1. Any dwelling unit in which the department determines such person is routinely present for 10 or more hours per week; and 2. Where a lead-based paint hazard is found in such a dwelling unit, any other dwelling unit in the same building in which a child under the age of one year resides... 3. Any covered facility... 4. Any park, playground or other area that is covered in bare soil..." (§ 17-911.a)
    *   "Whenever a report has been made to the department of a pregnant person with an elevated blood lead level, the department shall (i) conduct such investigation as may be necessary to identify potential sources of such elevated blood lead level, and (ii) after the birth of a child by such pregnant person, screen such child for elevated blood lead levels and assess whether the dwelling unit where such child resides contains a lead-based paint hazard or unsafe lead paint." (§ 17-911.b)
    *   "The department shall conduct a survey of such facility annually, and more often if necessary, to determine the physical condition of surface-coating material throughout each such facility and shall provide a copy of the survey results (i) to the department, which will make the information publicly available online, and (ii) to the parent or guardian of each child that attends such facility, as required by rules of the department." (§ 17-924.a)
    *   "Any owner of a building that has a water tank as part of its drinking water supply system shall have such water tank inspected at least once annually." (§ 17-194.b)
    *   "At a minimum, cooling towers, other than cooling towers whose use has been permanently discontinued and for which a notice of such discontinuation has been sent to the department of buildings, shall be inspected at least as frequently as every three months and tested at least as frequently as every month during periods of the year such cooling towers are in use." (§ 17-194.1.e)
    *   "Each inspection shall include an evaluation of the cooling tower and associated equipment for the presence of organic material, biofilm, algae and other visible contaminants." (§ 17-194.1.e.1)
    *   "Each test shall include collection of a sample to evaluate the presence of microbes in the water of the cooling tower." (§ 17-194.1.e.2)
    *   "Following each inspection of a child care service, the department shall post a summary child care service inspection report on the department's website and shall make summary child care service inspection reports available by calling 311." (§ 17-1302)
    *   "Each senior center and social adult day care that is a food service establishment shall be inspected by the department at least annually in accordance with article 81 of the New York City health code." (§ 17-1506.b)
    *   "The department shall establish and implement a system for grading and classifying inspection results for each vending vehicle or pushcart using letters to identify and represent a vending vehicle or pushcart's degree of compliance with laws and rules that require such vending vehicle and pushcart to operate in a sanitary manner to protect public health." (§ 17-325.3)
    *   "The department shall implement a consultative inspection program for food service establishments." (§ 17-1504.a)

    **Why:** Regular inspections are a core DOHMH function to ensure public health and safety across diverse regulated entities and environments.

    **One row represents:** A single inspection event.

    **Covers:** All inspections conducted by the DOHMH or its agents, including health inspections, environmental inspections, and compliance checks across various programs.

    **Columns:**
    *   Inspection ID
    *   Inspection Date
    *   Inspection Type (e.g., Communicable Disease Patient, Vessel, Building/Market, Unsound Articles, Rat, Food Vendor, Rental Horse Stable, Boarding Kennel, Pet Shop, Lead Hazard, Water Tank, Cooling Tower, Child Care Service, Food Service, Consultative, etc.)
    *   Inspected Entity Type (e.g., Person, Vessel, Building, Market, Store, Food Vending Unit, Stable, Kennel, Pet Shop, Dwelling Unit, Covered Facility, Water Tank, Cooling Tower, Child Care Service, Food Service Establishment, Senior Center, Social Adult Day Care)
    *   Inspected Entity ID (links to relevant entity datasets, e.g., Person ID, Vessel ID, Building ID, Food Vending Unit ID (3), Rental Horse ID (13), Pet Shop ID (15), Child Care Service ID (16), Cooling Tower ID (18), Water Tank ID (17))
    *   Inspector ID
    *   Inspector Department/Agency
    *   Inspection Outcome/Status (e.g., Pass, Fail, Compliant, Non-Compliant, Order Issued, Violation Issued)
    *   Detailed Observations/Findings
    *   Score/Grade (if applicable)
    *   Associated Violation ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 1)
    *   Associated Order ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 4)
    *   Complaint ID (if inspection was complaint-driven) (links to Dataset 5)
    *   Language Interpretation Services Used (Yes/No)
    *   Language of Interpretation (if applicable)

3.  **License and Permit Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "It shall be unlawful for any individual to act as a food vendor without having first obtained a license therefor from the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter." (§ 17-307.a.1)
    *   "It shall be unlawful to vend food from any vehicle or pushcart in a public space without having first obtained a permit for such vehicle or pushcart from the commissioner in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter." (§ 17-307.b.1.a)
    *   "On or after July 1, 2022 all new permits issued under this subchapter, except fresh fruits and vegetables permits, shall be designated for use only when any holder of a supervisory license is physically present and vending." (§ 17-307.b.5.a)
    *   "It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commissary, or place of food distribution, or a place wherein five or more pushcarts, or more than one vehicle are stored, without first obtaining a permit." (§ 17-307.c)
    *   "All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this subchapter shall be valid for two years unless sooner suspended or revoked." (§ 17-307.e)
    *   "The commissioner may issue temporary licenses and permits upon the furnishing of information and an application in such form and detail as such commissioner may prescribe and the payment of a fee pro-rated in accordance with the schedule of fees set forth in section 17-308 of this subchapter..." (§ 17-307.f.1)
    *   "On and after January first, nineteen hundred eighty-two no person shall use or offer the use of a horse in a rental horse business unless such horse is licensed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter." (§ 17-327.a)
    *   "It shall be unlawful for any person to be a purveyor without a license therefor and it shall be unlawful for any person to be a supervising technician or technician without a certificate of competency therefor." (§ 17-335.b.1)
    *   "The department shall issue licenses and certificates of competency and renewals thereof pursuant to this section. Each such license, certificate and renewal shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next succeeding the date of issuance thereof." (§ 17-335.b.4)
    *   "The commissioner may order the owner of a dangerous dog to register such dog with the department." (§ 17-345.a)
    *   "No person shall engage in the practice of tattooing without having obtained a license to engage in such practice in the manner prescribed in this subchapter." (§ 17-357.a)
    *   "The commissioner may issue a seven-day temporary license to a person holding a license or similar certification or registration to engage in the practice of tattooing issued under the jurisdiction of another political subdivision, state or nation." (§ 17-357.c)
    *   "No person shall operate a pet shop without a permit issued by the commissioner pursuant to this subchapter." (§ 17-372.a)
    *   "It shall be unlawful for any individual to operate a retail tobacco store or a retail electronic cigarette store without having registered with the department in accordance with the rules of the department." (§ 17-513.3)
    *   "It shall be unlawful for a person to operate a non-tobacco hookah establishment without a permit from the department." (§ 17-513.5.a)
    *   "A motor carrier shall certify to the board that it has established a drug testing program as required by the provisions of this chapter." (§ 17-612.a)
    *   "Every applicant for a new or renewal permit to operate a child care service shall disclose whether a serious injury or the death of a child in its care, or the care of any of its owners, directors, employees, volunteers or agents, has occurred." (§ 17-1304.a)

    **Why:** Licensing and permitting are fundamental regulatory activities, requiring detailed tracking of applications, approvals, and status changes.

    **One row represents:** A single license, permit, registration, or certification issued or applied for.

    **Covers:** All licenses, permits, registrations, and certifications issued by the DOHMH, including food vendor licenses/permits, rental horse licenses, inhalation therapy licenses/certificates, dangerous dog registrations, tattooist licenses, pet shop permits, tobacco/e-cigarette retail registrations, non-tobacco hookah establishment permits, motor carrier drug testing certifications, and child care service permits.

    **Columns:**
    *   License/Permit ID
    *   Application ID (links to Dataset 6)
    *   License/Permit Type (e.g., Food Vendor License, Food Vending Permit, Supervisory Food Vendor License, Fresh Fruits & Vegetables Permit, Commissary Permit, Rental Horse License, Inhalation Therapy Purveyor License, Inhalation Therapy Supervising Technician Certificate, Inhalation Therapy Technician Certificate, Dangerous Dog Registration, Tattooist License, Temporary Tattooist License, Pet Shop Permit, Retail Tobacco Store Registration, Retail Electronic Cigarette Store Registration, Non-Tobacco Hookah Establishment Permit, Motor Carrier Drug Testing Certification, Child Care Service Permit)
    *   Licensee/Permittee ID (e.g., Person ID, Business ID, Organization ID)
    *   Issue Date
    *   Expiration Date
    *   Status (e.g., Active, Suspended, Revoked, Expired, Denied)
    *   Date of Status Change
    *   Reason for Status Change (if applicable)
    *   Geographical Restrictions (if applicable, e.g., Borough, Police Precinct)
    *   Authorized Vending Items (for food vendors)
    *   Vehicle/Pushcart ID (for food vending permits) (links to Dataset 12)
    *   Horse ID (for rental horse licenses) (links to Dataset 13)
    *   Associated Supervisory License ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 3)
    *   Proof of Ownership (for food vending vehicle/pushcart leases)
    *   Lease Agreement Approval Status (for food vending vehicle/pushcart leases)
    *   Number of Permits Held (for food vendors, if applicable)
    *   Animal Abuse Registry Check Performed (for pet shops/animal rescue groups) (links to Dataset 20)
    *   Animal Abuse Registry Check Result (for pet shops/animal rescue groups)
    *   Workers' Compensation/Disability Insurance Proof (for pet shops)
    *   Uncorrected Violations/Unpaid Fines (for pet shops)
    *   Serious Injury/Death Disclosure (for child care services)
    *   Felony Conviction Disclosure (for child care services)

4.  **Public Health Orders and Enforcement Actions**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "To cause any avenue, street, alley or other passage whatever, to be fenced up or otherwise inclosed if it shall deem the public safety requires it, and to adopt suitable measures for preventing all persons from going to any part of the city so inclosed;" (§ 17-104.a.1)
    *   "To forbid all communication with the house or family infected with any communicable disease except by means of physicians, nurses or messengers to carry the necessary advice, medicines and provisions to the afflicted;" (§ 17-104.a.2)
    *   "To adopt such means for preventing all communication between any part of the city infected with a disease of communicable character and all other parts of the city, as shall be prompt and effectual." (§ 17-104.a.3)
    *   "If the department deem it probable that any such disease may be brought into the city or communicated to the inhabitants thereof, it may by order direct any vessel lying at a place within three hundred yards of any wharf, landing place or shore of the city to be removed at least three hundred yards therefrom within six hours after a copy of such order, certified by the secretary of the department, shall be delivered to the person or persons having command of such vessel, or to the master, owner or consignee thereof." (§ 17-107.b)
    *   "The board may issue a proclamation declaring any place where there shall be reason to believe a communicable disease actually exists, to be an infected place within the meaning of the health laws of this state." (§ 17-108.a)
    *   "The powers of the department shall include the ordering and enforcing in the same manner as other orders are provided to be enforced, the repairs of buildings, houses and other structures; the regulation and control of all public markets in relation to the cleanliness, ventilation and drainage thereof and the prevention of sale or offering for sale of improper articles; the removal of any obstruction, matter or thing in or upon the public streets, sidewalks or places, which, in the opinion of the department, may lead to conditions dangerous to life or health; the prevention of accidents by which life or health may be endangered; and generally the abatement of all nuisances." (§ 17-113.a)
    *   "The department shall have within the city all common law rights to abate any nuisance without suit, which can or does in this state belong to any person." (§ 17-114)
    *   "The department, when it shall judge it necessary, may cause any cargo or part thereof, or any matter or thing within the city, that may be putrid or otherwise dangerous to the public health, to be destroyed or removed." (§ 17-118)
    *   "Whenever in its opinion the protection of the public health requires the drainage of any lands in the city, by means other than sewers, the department may make an order describing the location of such lands, and directing the proper drainage thereof, and construction of drains therefor, by the commissioner of design and construction." (§ 17-119.a)
    *   "An order for the paving, filling, concreting, draining or regulating of any yards or cellars within the city shall be made by the department only upon reasonable notice to the owner or agent thereof." (§ 17-120)
    *   "Whenever the commissioner shall find, after investigation, that any physically handicapped child is in need of surgical, medical or therapeutic treatment or hospital care or appliances or devices, the commissioner, upon the request or with the consent of the legal custodian of such child, may order such surgical, medical or therapeutic treatment, hospital care or appliances or devices, and after investigation as provided in subdivision c hereof, may order the legally responsible relatives to pay the cost thereof." (§ 17-121.b)
    *   "The commissioner may send to such place as he or she may direct, all aliens and other persons in the city, not residents thereof, who shall be sick of any communicable disease." (§ 17-124)
    *   "Whenever any building or any part thereof in the city is infected with communicable disease, or by reason of want of repair has become dangerous to life or is unfit for human habitation... the department may issue an order requiring all persons therein to vacate such building or part thereof for the reasons to be stated therein." (§ 17-159)
    *   "Whenever any building or part thereof in the city, in the opinion of the department... is so unfit for human habitation that the evils in, or caused by such building, can not be remedied by repairs or otherwise except by the destruction of such building or a portion thereof, the department having first made an order to vacate such building, if it deem such course just and proper, may condemn the same and order it removed." (§ 17-160)
    *   "The department may by order direct the removal, to a place to be designated by it, of all things within the city which, in its opinion are unfit for human consumption or use or which shall be infected in any manner likely to communicate disease to the inhabitants." (§ 17-165.b)
    *   "The commissioner may order the humane destruction of any dog that kills or causes severe injury to a human being." (§ 17-344)
    *   "If, after the hearing, the commissioner determines that the dog is dangerous, he or she may order the owner to comply with one or more of the following requirements, in any combination thereof: a. Registration... b. Muzzling or confinement... c. Liability insurance... d. Humane destruction... e. Other remedies." (§ 17-345)
    *   "A horse for which such an order has been issued shall not be returned to work until it has recovered from the condition which caused the issuance of the order or until such condition has improved sufficiently that its return to work will not aggravate the condition or otherwise endanger the health of the horse." (§ 17-330.m)
    *   "The department may serve an order on the owner requiring compliance within a specified time. If such order is not complied with the department may authorize any agency of the city to act as agent of the department in executing such order and may recover the costs of such execution from the owner in accordance with any of the methods set forth in sections 17-149 through 17-158." (§ 17-194.1.g)
    *   "In the event that the department determines that an indoor allergen hazard exists, the department shall order the owner to correct the condition and the underlying causes of such a condition within twenty-one days, in a manner and under such safety conditions as it may specify, including the integrated pest management practices in section 27-2017.8 and the work practices established pursuant to section 27-2017.9." (§ 17-199.6.b)
    *   "Whenever a condition prohibited by this section is found to exist, the department shall immediately serve an order on the operator of such facility to remediate the condition." (§ 17-922.d)
    *   "The department may make and enforce orders with relation to the care, use, operation, testing and repair of inhalation therapy service or equipment." (§ 17-335.e.4)
    *   "The commissioner or his or her designee may order the person operating the business or conducting the activity to cease and desist from such business or activity. The department may also order the person who owns the premises in which the business is operated or activity is conducted to take whatever action may be necessary to prohibit such business or activity from continuing on such premises." (§ 17-372.b.3)

    **Why:** Orders are direct actions by the DOHMH to address public health threats and enforce compliance, requiring detailed tracking for implementation and follow-up.

    **One row represents:** A single order or enforcement action issued by the DOHMH.

    **Covers:** All orders issued by the DOHMH, including communicable disease control orders, vessel removal orders, building repair/market regulation/obstruction removal orders, nuisance abatement orders, dangerous property destruction/removal orders, drainage orders, yard/cellar improvement orders, physically handicapped children treatment orders, alien/non-resident removal orders, building vacation/condemnation orders, unsound article removal orders, dangerous dog control orders, rental horse removal orders, cooling tower compliance orders, indoor allergen hazard remediation orders, covered facility lead remediation orders, inhalation therapy equipment orders, and pet shop cease and desist orders.

    **Columns:**
    *   Order ID
    *   Order Date
    *   Order Type (e.g., Communicable Disease Control, Vessel Removal, Building Repair, Nuisance Abatement, Dangerous Property Removal, Drainage, Yard/Cellar Improvement, Physically Handicapped Child Treatment, Alien/Non-Resident Removal, Building Vacation, Building Condemnation, Unsound Article Removal, Dangerous Dog Control, Rental Horse Removal, Cooling Tower Compliance, Indoor Allergen Hazard Remediation, Covered Facility Lead Remediation, Inhalation Therapy Equipment, Pet Shop Cease and Desist)
    *   Subject Entity Type (e.g., Person, Household, Vessel, Building, Market, Street, Alley, Land, Yard, Cellar, Child, Alien, Cargo, Dog, Horse, Cooling Tower, Dwelling Unit, Covered Facility, Business)
    *   Subject Entity ID (links to relevant entity datasets, e.g., Person ID, Vessel ID, Building ID, Property ID, Child ID, Dog ID (14), Horse ID (13), Cooling Tower ID (18), Dwelling Unit ID, Covered Facility ID, Business ID)
    *   Description of Condition/Violation Leading to Order
    *   Required Action
    *   Compliance Deadline
    *   Order Status (e.g., Issued, Complied, Non-Complied, Executed by Agency, Revoked, Modified, Appealed)
    *   Date of Status Change
    *   Enforcing Officer/Inspector ID
    *   Enforcing Department/Agency
    *   Associated Violation ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 1)
    *   Service Method (e.g., Personal, Mail, Posting, Publication)
    *   Date of Service
    *   Proof of Service
    *   Objection/Appeal Filed (Yes/No)
    *   Objection/Appeal Outcome (links to Dataset 7)
    *   Execution by Agency (Yes/No)
    *   Execution Expenses (links to Dataset 8)

5.  **Complaint and Service Request Logs**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "The number and nature of 311 requests for service or complaints related to rat activity within any 12-month period within a given sanitation district or community district;" (§ 17-133.2.a.4)
    *   "Within 14 days of receipt of a covered complaint, the department shall make its best effort to inspect the building to which such complaint pertains for signs of rat activity or conditions that attract rats..." (§ 17-133.4.b)
    *   "Any person who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may do so with the department." (§ 17-507.b)
    *   "The department shall respond to complaints regarding unsafe lead-based paint work practices." (§ 17-185)
    *   "The department shall respond to complaints of unsafe work practices related to the correction of indoor mold hazard violations that result in chemical vapors, dust, or other environmental hazards, and promptly refer complaints of unsafe pest control to the New York state department of environmental conservation." (§ 17-199.8)
    *   "establishing a system to receive questions, comments, complaints, and compliments with respect to any food service establishment inspection, including but not limited to, the establishment, operation, and dissemination of a central telephone hotline and website to receive such questions, comments, complaints, and compliments;" (§ 17-1505.b.1)
    *   "Information on how to make complaints to the department and relevant state agencies regarding a child care service or home-based child care program, including relevant phone numbers and websites;" (§ 17-1311.b.1)

    **Why:** Tracking public complaints and service requests is essential for identifying issues, prioritizing responses, and demonstrating accountability.

    **One row represents:** A single complaint or service request received by the DOHMH.

    **Covers:** All complaints and service requests related to rat activity, smoking policy violations, unsafe lead paint work practices, unsafe indoor allergen remediation, and food service establishment inspections, and child care services.

    **Columns:**
    *   Complaint ID
    *   Date Received
    *   Time Received
    *   Complaint Source (e.g., 311, Website, Phone, Walk-in, Agency Referral)
    *   Complainant Contact Information (if provided, e.g., Name, Phone, Email)
    *   Complaint Type (e.g., Rat Activity, Smoking Violation, Unsafe Lead Work, Unsafe Allergen Remediation, Food Service Inspection, Child Care Service)
    *   Location ID (e.g., Building ID, Premises Address, Food Service Establishment ID (19), Child Care Service ID (16))
    *   Description of Complaint
    *   Priority Level (e.g., Emergency, High, Medium, Low)
    *   Assigned Inspector/Team ID
    *   Date Assigned
    *   Resolution Status (e.g., Investigated, Resolved, Referred, Closed)
    *   Date Resolved/Closed
    *   Associated Inspection ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 2)
    *   Associated Violation ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 1)
    *   Referral Agency (if applicable)

6.  **Application Records (General)**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "All applications for a license or permit shall be accompanied by payment of the fee and shall be in such form and detail as the commissioner may prescribe." (§ 17-309.a)
    *   "In addition to any other information required, the commissioner shall require the following information: 1. The name, home and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is applying for a permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place, the name, home address and license number of every food vendor who will be authorized to operate such applicant's vehicle or pushcart and the legal relationship between such applicant and such food vendor. 2. A description of the food to be offered for sale and a description of the vehicle or pushcart to be used and a statement whether or not the application is for a fresh fruits and vegetables permit. 3. Three prints of a full-face photograph of the applicant taken not more than thirty days prior to the date of the application. 4. Where the application is for a permit, proof that the applicant has obtained a certificate of authority to collect sales taxes pursuant to section eleven hundred thirty-four of the tax law from the New York state department of taxation and finance. 5. Whether such applicant is an individual, partnership or other association, or a corporation or limited liability company and if such applicant is an individual applying for a permit to vend food from a vehicle or pushcart in a public place, whether any of such applicant's unemancipated children hold such permits; if a partnership, limited liability company or other association, the name and address of each partner, member, officer or manager of such entity; if a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders. 6. An applicant who is a non-resident of the city shall provide the name and address of a registered agent within the city or designate the commissioner as his or her agent upon whom process or other notification may be served. 7. No City officer or employee shall inquire about an applicant's immigration or citizenship status as part of an application made pursuant to this section. Information about an applicant's immigration or citizenship status shall not affect the consideration of the application for a food vendor's license or renewal thereof. 8. Proof that the applicant has obtained the appropriate seal of approval from a weights and measures official for his or her weighing or measuring device or system as required under section one hundred eighty-three of the agriculture and markets law." (§ 17-309.b)
    *   "Any person intending to engage in the practice of tattooing shall apply to the commissioner for a tattoo license, in the form and manner prescribed by the commissioner. Such application shall contain such information as the commissioner deems reasonable and necessary to determine the qualifications for granting a license to the applicant." (§ 17-358.a)
    *   "Any person eighteen years of age or older may apply to the commissioner for a license to practice tattooing. No license may be issued to a person who has been convicted of criminal tattooing of a minor in violation of section 260.21 of the New York state penal law within the year immediately preceding such license application." (§ 17-358.b)
    *   "An application for a permit required pursuant to section 17-372 of this title or for the renewal of such a permit shall be made and submitted on forms furnished by the department." (§ 17-373.a)
    *   "The application shall contain all information required by the department. If the applicant for the permit is a sole proprietorship, the application shall be signed by the individual who would be the permittee. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed by a partner. If the applicant is a limited partnership, the application shall be signed by the managing or general partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by an officer or director of the corporation or by any member, if management is vested in members. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall be signed by any manager of the limited liability company. Such signature shall constitute an agreement that the permittee assumes responsibility for the conduct of the business, occupation or other activity concerned in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter or other applicable law." (§ 17-373.c)
    *   "The application shall, at a minimum, include: 1. The name, age, gender, residence and business address, and telephone numbers of the applicant, each member of the partnership, limited liability company or group, and each officer of the corporation, as applicable; 2. To the extent that such information is relevant to the conduct of the business, trade, occupation or other activity under permit, information concerning the applicant, its individual members or officers, relating to education, training or experience, moral character, physical health, addiction to alcohol or habit-forming drugs, history of prior criminal conviction, including violations and offenses, history of mental illness, and record of insolvency or bankruptcy; 3. Proof of current workers' compensation and disability benefits insurance coverage for all employees, or of a certificate of exemption filed with the workers' compensation board; 4. The e-mail address of (i) the individual owner of the business, (ii) the person exercising daily management and control of the business, or (iii) the person who is authorized by law to accept service of process on behalf of the applicant; and 6. Any information that the department determines may be necessary in order to contact the permittee in the event of an emergency." (§ 17-373.d)
    *   "The commissioner shall not issue or renew a permit unless department records show there are no finally determined uncorrected violations or unpaid outstanding fines, penalties or forfeitures imposed by any court, administrative tribunal established within the office of administrative trials and hearings or administrative tribunal established in accordance with the administrative code or the charter, which are due and payable by the applicant or the permittee." (§ 17-373.e)
    *   "The commissioner shall not issue a new permit or renewal of an existing permit to any person listed on the animal abuse registry created pursuant to chapter sixteen of this title." (§ 17-373.f)
    *   "Any city agency, including the department, is authorized to apply to the commissioner for a waiver of the restrictions established pursuant to section 17-1203 of this chapter. Such application shall be in a form and manner prescribed by the commissioner and shall contain such information as the commissioner deems reasonable and necessary to determine whether such waiver should be granted." (§ 17-1206)

    **Why:** Applications are the entry point for regulatory oversight, requiring detailed tracking of submitted information and processing status.

    **One row represents:** A single application for a license, permit, registration, or waiver.

    **Covers:** All applications submitted to the DOHMH for various licenses, permits, registrations, and waivers, including food vendor licenses/permits, rental horse licenses, inhalation therapy licenses/certificates, dangerous dog registrations, tattooist licenses, pet shop permits, tobacco/e-cigarette retail registrations, non-tobacco hookah establishment permits, child care service permits, and city agency pesticide use waivers.

    **Columns:**
    *   Application ID
    *   Application Date
    *   Application Type (e.g., Food Vendor License, Food Vending Permit, Rental Horse License, Inhalation Therapy Purveyor License, Inhalation Therapy Technician Certificate, Dangerous Dog Registration, Tattooist License, Pet Shop Permit, Tobacco Store Registration, Hookah Establishment Permit, Motor Carrier Drug Testing Certification, Child Care Service Permit, Pesticide Use Waiver)
    *   Applicant ID (e.g., Person ID, Business ID, Organization ID)
    *   Applicant Name
    *   Applicant Address (Home/Business)
    *   Applicant Phone Number
    *   Applicant Email Address
    *   Applicant Type (e.g., Individual, Partnership, Corporation, LLC)
    *   Applicant Age (if individual)
    *   Applicant Gender (if individual)
    *   Description of Business/Activity
    *   Description of Food/Vehicle/Pushcart (for food vendors)
    *   Photograph Submitted (Yes/No) (for food vendors)
    *   Proof of Sales Tax Authority (Yes/No) (for food vendors)
    *   Proof of Weights & Measures Seal (Yes/No) (for food vendors)
    *   Names/Addresses of Partners/Officers/Members/Shareholders (if applicable)
    *   Non-Resident Agent Name/Address (if applicable)
    *   Immigration/Citizenship Status Inquiry (No)
    *   Prior Convictions/Violations (Yes/No, details if yes)
    *   Workers' Compensation/Disability Insurance Proof (Yes/No) (for pet shops)
    *   Uncorrected Violations/Unpaid Fines (Yes/No) (for pet shops)
    *   Animal Abuse Registry Check Result (for pet shops) (links to Dataset 20)
    *   Serious Injury/Death Disclosure (for child care services)
    *   Felony Conviction Disclosure (for child care services)
    *   Application Status (e.g., Submitted, In Review, Approved, Denied, Withdrawn)
    *   Date of Status Change
    *   Reason for Denial/Withdrawal (if applicable)
    *   Associated License/Permit ID (if approved) (links to Dataset 3)
    *   Language Preference for Inspections

7.  **Order Modification and Appeal Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "If any party, within three days after service or attempted service of such order upon him or her and before its execution is commenced, shall apply to the board, or the chairperson thereof, to have such order or its execution stayed or modified, it shall then be the duty of the board to temporarily suspend or modify it at the execution thereof, save in cases of imminent peril to the public health, when the board may exercise extraordinary powers, as specified in section five hundred sixty-three of the charter and to give such party or parties together, as the case in the opinion of such board may require, a reasonable and fair opportunity to be heard before it and to present facts and proofs, according to its rules and directions, against such declaration and the execution of such order, or in favor of its modification, according to the regulation of the board." (§ 17-146)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)

    **Why:** Tracking requests to modify or appeal DOHMH orders is essential for due process and administrative review.

    **One row represents:** A single request to stay or modify an order, or an objection to an order.

    **Covers:** All applications to stay or modify DOHMH orders, and objections to lead abatement or remediation orders.

    **Columns:**
    *   Request ID
    *   Order ID (links to Dataset 4)
    *   Request Date
    *   Request Type (e.g., Stay, Modification, Objection)
    *   Requesting Party ID (e.g., Person ID, Business ID)
    *   Grounds for Request/Objection
    *   Hearing Scheduled (Yes/No)
    *   Hearing Date
    *   Hearing Outcome (e.g., Granted, Denied, Withdrawn, Modified)
    *   Date of Outcome
    *   Reason for Outcome (e.g., Faulty Testing, Inconclusive Results, Exemption)
    *   Order Status After Review (e.g., Original Order Reaffirmed, Modified, Suspended, Revoked)

8.  **Order Execution and Expense Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "If such order is not complied with, or so far complied with as the board may regard as reasonable, within five days after service or attempted service or within any shorter time, which, in case of imminent peril to the public health, the board may have designated, or is not thereafter speedily and fully executed, then such order may be executed as any of the orders of the board or department. Any agency of the city is authorized to act as agent of the department in executing such order. In the event that any agency shall so act, it shall certify and transmit to the department its expenses in the execution of such order separately in respect of each separately owned parcel of property. Such expenses shall be reimbursed to such agency and shall be chargeable and collectible as expenses of the department in connection with the execution of an order as referred to in this chapter." (§ 17-147)
    *   "The department, in case it has incurred any expense, or has rendered service for which payment is due, and as the rules of the department may provide, may institute and maintain a suit against any one liable for such expenses, or against any person, firm, or corporation, owing or who may owe such rent or compensation, and may recover the expenses so incurred under any such order." (§ 17-150)
    *   "There shall be filed in the office of the department a record of all work caused to be performed by or on behalf of the department in executing any order of the board or department. Such records shall be kept on a building by building basis and shall be accessible to the public during business hours. Within thirty days after the issuance of a purchase or work order to cause such work to be done, entry of such order shall be made on the records of the department. Such entry shall constitute notice to all parties." (§ 17-151.a)
    *   "All expenses incurred by or on behalf of the department for such work, pursuant to this title or any other applicable provision of law, shall constitute a lien upon the land and buildings upon or in respect to which, or either of which, the work required by such order has been done, or expenses incurred, when the amount thereof shall have been definitely computed as a statement of account by the department and the department shall cause to be filed in the office of the city collector an entry of the account stated in the book in which such charges against the premises are to be entered." (§ 17-151.b)
    *   "When the department shall have executed, or so far executed as the department may require, any order, a certificate setting forth the expenses of such execution, itemized generally, and the date thereof shall be filed among the records of the department with the order so executed; and the department shall take care by, or through some proper officer, or otherwise, that the expenses of such execution be so stated with fairness and accuracy." (§ 17-153.a)
    *   "Whenever the expenses attending the execution of any order of the department may be made the subject of a suit by it, there may be joined in the same suit a claim or claims for any penalty or penalties for violation of any health provisions, or for the violation or omission to perform or obey such order, or any prior order of the department, or for the not doing of that, or any portion of that, for the doing of which such expenses arose or were incurred; and the proper joint or several judgment may be had against one or more of the defendants in the suit, as they or either of them may be liable in respect of both such claims, or either or any of them." (§ 17-153.c)
    *   "The department may serve a copy of the order under or by reason of which such expenses were authorized or incurred with a copy of the affidavit stating the expenses of the execution of such order, or if the claim be a judgment, may serve a transcript of such judgment, and an affidavit showing the expense of its execution if there be any, upon any person or corporation, owing, or who is about to owe any such compensation, or owing or about to owe any rent or compensation for the use or occupation of any grounds, premises or buildings or any part thereof, to which such order or judgment relates, and in respect of which such expenses embraced in such judgment related or were incurred, and may, at the time of such service, demand in writing that such rent, or any such compensation to the extent of such claim for such expenses, or for any such judgment or expenses in executing the same, when such rent or compensation becomes due and payable, be paid to the department." (§ 17-154)
    *   "After the service of such papers and such demand, any tenant, lessee, occupant, or other person owing, or about to owe, any such rent or any such compensation when it shall mature, or become payable, shall pay the same, and from time to time pay any other amount thereof, as the same may become due and payable, or so much thereof as is sufficient to satisfy any such judgment or claim for expenses, or both, so served, to the department, and a receipt shall be given therefor, stating on account of what order or judgment and expenses the same has been paid and received; and the amount so received shall be deposited where other funds of the department are kept, to the special account of the department." (§ 17-155)

    **Why:** Tracking the execution of orders and associated expenses is vital for cost recovery, financial management, and ensuring compliance.

    **One row represents:** A single instance of an order being executed by the DOHMH or its agent.

    **Covers:** All instances where the DOHMH or another city agency executes an order due to non-compliance, including details of the work performed, expenses incurred, and lien filings.

    **Columns:**
    *   Execution ID
    *   Order ID (links to Dataset 4)
    *   Execution Date
    *   Executing Agency
    *   Description of Work Performed
    *   Total Expenses Incurred
    *   Itemized Expenses (general categories)
    *   Property ID (links to relevant property datasets, e.g., Building ID)
    *   Owner/Liable Party ID (e.g., Person ID, Business ID)
    *   Lien Filed (Yes/No)
    *   Lien Filing Date
    *   Lien Amount
    *   Lien Status (e.g., Active, Paid, Foreclosed)
    *   Date Lien Satisfied
    *   Payment Received (Yes/No)
    *   Payment Amount
    *   Date Payment Received
    *   Associated Suit ID (if applicable) (links to Dataset 1)

9.  **Vital Records (Births, Fetal Deaths, Deaths)**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "The department shall keep a record of the births, fetal deaths and deaths filed with it, the births, fetal deaths and deaths shall be numbered separately and recorded in the order in which they are respectively received." (§ 17-166.a)
    *   "There shall be no specific statement on the record or report of birth as to whether the child is born in or out of wedlock or as to the marital name or status of the mother." (§ 17-166.b)
    *   "The name of the putative father of a child born out of wedlock shall not be entered on the birth certificate by the person preparing the birth certificate without the putative father's consent in writing, duly verified by him and given to the physician, midwife or person acting as midwife who was in attendance upon the birth and filed with the hospital record of the birth, or, in the case of a birth in a place other than a hospital or on an ambulance service connected therewith, filed with the records of the physician, midwife or person acting as midwife who was in attendance upon the birth. In the event the consent in writing of the putative father is not given, particulars relating to the putative father, other than his name, may be entered." (§ 17-166.d)
    *   "The certificate of induced termination of pregnancy shall not, unless requested by the woman contain the name of the woman, her social security number or any other information which would permit her to be identified except as provided in this subdivision. The department shall develop a unique, confidential identifier to be used on the certificate of induced termination of pregnancy, to be used in connection with the exercise of the commissioner's authority to monitor the quality of care provided by any individual or entity licensed to perform an abortion in this state and to permit coordination of data concerning the medical history of the woman for purposes of conducting surveillance scientific studies and research." (§ 17-166.e)
    *   "The department shall establish a procedure to request correction of sex designation on a death record and shall post an application form and instructions for making such a request on its website." (§ 17-166.1.b)
    *   "A new birth record shall be made whenever: 1. Proof is submitted to the department that the previously unwed parents of a person have intermarried subsequent to the birth of such person; 2. Notification is received by the department from the clerk of a court of competent jurisdiction or proof is submitted of a judgment, order or decree relating to the parentage of the person; 3. Notification is received by the department from the clerk of a court of competent jurisdiction or proof is submitted of a judgment, order or decree relating to the adoption of the person." (§ 17-167.a)
    *   "On every birth record made because of adoption, a notation that it is filed pursuant to paragraph three of subdivision a of this section of the code shall be entered." (§ 17-167.b)
    *   "When a new birth record is made the department shall substitute such new record for the birth record then on file. The department shall place the original birth record and the proof, notification and papers pertaining to the new birth record under seal. Seals shall not be broken except by order of a court of competent jurisdiction." (§ 17-167.c)
    *   "The department shall make a new birth record when an applicant submits an application and supporting documentation pursuant to this subdivision and subdivision c of this section requesting the correction of sex designation to the applicant's birth record." (§ 17-167.1.b)
    *   "The department shall keep a record of the births, fetal deaths and deaths filed with it, the births, fetal deaths and deaths shall be numbered separately and recorded in the order in which they are respectively received." (§ 17-166.a)
    *   "Records shall be kept in the office of the chief medical examiner, properly indexed, stating the name, if known, of every person dying under the circumstances described in paragraph one of subdivision (f) of section five hundred fifty-seven of the charter, the place where the body was found and the date of death. To the record of each case shall be attached the original report of the medical examiner and the detailed findings of the autopsy, if any." (§ 17-205)
    *   "The department shall, subject to the approval of the board of health, develop an electronic death registration system. Such electronic death registration system shall include an internet based electronic method of collecting, storing, recording, transmitting, amending and authenticating information necessary to complete a death registration." (§ 17-196.b)

    **Why:** Maintaining accurate and comprehensive vital records is a fundamental public health responsibility for demographic analysis and legal purposes.

    **One row represents:** A single birth, fetal death, or death event.

    **Covers:** All births, fetal deaths, and deaths occurring within the city, including original and supplemental records, and requests for sex designation corrections.

    **Columns:**
    *   Record ID (Unique identifier for each birth, fetal death, or death)
    *   Record Type (Birth, Fetal Death, Death)
    *   Date of Event
    *   Time of Event (if applicable)
    *   Place of Event (e.g., Hospital Name, Address, Home Address)
    *   Borough of Event
    *   Individual Name (First, Middle, Last)
    *   Sex Assigned at Birth
    *   Gender Identity (if corrected/requested)
    *   Date of Birth
    *   Parent(s) Name(s) (for birth records)
    *   Mother's Marital Status (not explicitly stated on record)
    *   Putative Father's Consent (Yes/No, for out-of-wedlock births)
    *   Putative Father's Name (if consent given)
    *   Putative Father's Other Particulars (if no consent)
    *   Physician/Midwife/Attendant ID
    *   Hospital Record ID (if applicable)
    *   Date Record Received/Filed
    *   Original Record ID (for supplemental records)
    *   Reason for New/Supplemental Record (e.g., Parents Intermarried, Parentage Judgment, Adoption)
    *   Adoption Notation (Yes/No, for adoption-based records)
    *   Sex Designation Correction Request Date (if applicable)
    *   Sex Designation Correction Approval Date (if applicable)
    *   Cause of Death (for death records)
    *   Medical Examiner Case ID (for reportable deaths) (links to Dataset 10)
    *   Electronic Registration System Used (Yes/No)
    *   Unique Confidential Identifier (for induced termination of pregnancy)
    *   Physician License Status (for birth records, if redacted copy requested)
    *   COVID-19 Related Death (Yes/No, for fee waiver)

10. **Medical Examiner Case Records**

    **Quotes:**
    *   "It shall be the duty of any citizen who becomes aware of the death of any person, occurring under the circumstances described in paragraph one of subdivision (f) of section five hundred fifty-seven of the charter, to report such death forthwith to the office of the chief medical examiner, and to a police officer who shall forthwith notify the officer in charge of the station-house in the police precinct in which such person died." (§ 17-201)
    *   "Upon any such death, the officer in charge of the station-house in the police precinct in which such person died shall immediately notify the office of chief medical examiner of the known facts concerning the time, place, manner and circumstances of such death." (§ 17-202.a)
    *   "Immediately upon receipt of such notification the chief medical examiner, or a deputy chief medical examiner, or a medical examiner, or a medical investigator, or a lay medical investigator shall go to and take charge of the dead body. Such medical examiner, medical investigator or lay medical investigator shall fully investigate the essential facts concerning the circumstances of the death, taking the names and addresses of as many witnesses thereto as it may be practicable to obtain, and shall record all such facts and file the same in the office of chief medical examiner." (§ 17-202.a)
    *   "Such medical examiner, medical investigator or lay medical investigator shall take possession of any portable objects which, in his or her opinion, may be useful in establishing the cause of death, and except as provided in subdivision c hereof, shall deliver them to the police department." (§ 17-202.a)
    *   "The police officer detailed in such cases shall, in the absence of next of kin of the deceased person, take possession of all property of value found on such person, make an exact inventory thereof on his or her report, and deliver such property to the police department, which shall surrender the same to the person entitled to its custody or possession." (§ 17-202.b)
    *   "Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions a and b of this section, any suicide note or other written evidence of suicide found on such deceased person shall be delivered to the chief medical examiner and shall be retained by said medical examiner." (§ 17-202.c)
    *   "If it may be concluded with reasonable certainty that death occurred from natural causes or obvious traumatic injury, and there are no other circumstances which would appear to require an autopsy, the chief medical examiner, deputy chief medical examiner or medical examiner or medical investigator in charge shall certify the cause of death and file a report of his or her findings in the office of chief medical examiner." (§ 17-203)
    *   "If, however, in the opinion of a medical examiner, an autopsy is necessary, the same shall be performed by a medical examiner. Where indicated, the autopsy shall include toxicologic, histologic, microbiologic and serologic examinations. A detailed description of the findings of all autopsies shall be written or dictated. The findings of the investigation at the scene of death, the autopsy and any toxicologic, histologic, serologic and microbiologic examinations, and the conclusions drawn therefrom shall be filed in the office of chief medical examiner. Such findings and conclusions shall be signed by the medical examiner performing the autopsy." (§ 17-203)
    *   "Whenever an application is made pursuant to law for a permit to cremate the body of any person, the department, board or office in which such application is filed shall forward such application to the chief medical examiner who shall thereupon cause an investigation and report to be made thereon." (§ 17-204)
    *   "In the event that the chief medical examiner, or a deputy chief medical examiner, or a medical examiner shall, in the course of such investigation, determine that reasonable grounds exist therefor, an autopsy shall be performed upon such body by a medical examiner." (§ 17-204)
    *   "Records shall be kept in the office of the chief medical examiner, properly indexed, stating the name, if known, of every person dying under the circumstances described in paragraph one of subdivision (f) of section five hundred fifty-seven of the charter, the place where the body was found and the date of death. To the record of each case shall be attached the original report of the medical examiner and the detailed findings of the autopsy, if any." (§ 17-205)
    *   "The department, from time to time may make rules and regulations fixing the time of rendering, and defining the form of returns and reports to be made to it by the chief medical examiner, in all cases of death which shall be investigated by him or her. The chief medical examiner shall conform to such rules and regulations." (§ 17-116)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to subdivision a of this section shall include the number of orders withdrawn in full by the department, disaggregated by the reasons such orders were withdrawn, including, but not limited to: 1. Faulty paint sampling or testing by the department; 2. Inconclusive or contradicting test results; or 3. Exemptions due to the date a tested dwelling was erected." (§ 17-916.b)
    *   "The department shall submit to the mayor and the speaker of the council, and make publicly available on the department’s website, a report on the number of objections to department orders for lead abatement or remediation received by the department pursuant to paragraph 3 of subdivision d of section 173.13 of the health code, or successor provision." (§ 17-916.a)
    *   "The report required pursuant to